['A branch of a Statute made in the eight yeere of Henry the sixt, for the trade to Norwey, Sweveland, Den marke, and Fynmarke. ITEM because that the kings most deare Uncle, the kingof Denmarke, Norway & Sweveland, as the same oursoveraigne Lord the king of his intimation hath understood, considering the manifold & great losses, perils,hurts and damage which have late happened aswell tohim and his, as to other foraines and strangers, and alsofriends and speciall subjects of our said soveraigne Lordthe king of his Realme of England, by ye going in,entring & passage of such forain & strange persons intohis realme of Norwey & other dominions, streits, territories, jurisdictions & places subdued and subject to him,specially into his Iles of Fynmarke, and elswhere, aswellin their persons as their things and goods: for eschuingof such losses, perils, hurts & damages, and that suchlike (which God forbid) should not hereafter happen: oursaid soveraigne Lord the king hath ordeined and statuted,that all and singular strangers, aswell Englishmen andothers willing to apply by Ship and come into his Realmeof Norwey and other dominions, streits, territories,jurisdictions, Isles & places aforesaid with their ships,to the intent to get or have fish or any other Marchandises,or goods, shall apply and come to his Towne of Northberne, where the said king of Denmarke hath speciallyordained and stablished his staple for the concourses ofstrangers and specially of Englishmen, to the exerciseof such Marchandises: granting to the said Englishmenthat they shall there injoy in and by all things the samefavour, privileges and prerogatives which they of theHans did enjoy. Therefore our said soveraigne Lordthe king willing the love, affinitie and amities to befirmely observed, which betwixt his said Uncle and hisnoble progenitors of good memory, their Realmes, lands,dominions, streites, territories, jurisdictions and theirsaid places, and the same our soveraigne Lord the king& his noble progenitours of famous memory, his greatmen, subjects, Realmes, lands & dominions hath beneof old times hitherto continued, nor nothing by our saidsoveraigne Lord the king or his people to be attemptedor done whereby such amities by reason of any dissensions, enemities or discords might be broken: by theadvise of the Lords spirituall & temporall & of thecommons of his said Realme of England, assembled inthis present Parliament, hath ordained, prohibiting thatnone of his liege people nor subjects of his Realme ofEngland by audacitie of their follie presume to enter theRealmes, lands, dominions, straits, territories, jurisdictions & places of the said king of Denmarke against yeordinance, prohibition & interdiction of ye same his Uncleabove remembred, & in contempt of the same, upon paineof forfeiture of all their moveable goods & imprisonmentof their persons at the kings will.', 'Another branch of a statute made in the tenth yeere of the reigne of Henry the sixt concerning the state of the English Marchants in the dominions of the king of Denmarke. ITEM because that our soveraigne Lord the king at thegrievous complaint to him made in this Parliament bythe commons of his realme of England being in thisParliament is informed, that many of his faithfull liegepeople be greatly impoverished, undone, & in point tobe destroyed by the king of Denmarke & his lieges, whichbe of the amitie of the king our soveraigne Lord, becausethat they do daily take of his said faithful subjects theirgoods, so that they have taken of marchants of Yorkand Kingston upon Hul goods & marchandises to thevalour of v.M.li. within a yeere, and of other lieges &marchants of ye Realme of England goods & cattals tothe valour of xx.M.li. wherof they have no remedie ofthe said king of Denmarke, nor of none other, forasmuchas none of them commeth within the Realme of England,nor nothing have in the same Realme of England, & thatye goods be taken out of the same Realme: The kingwilling to provide remedy for his said liege people, hathordeined & established, that if ye goods of any of yesaid his lieges be or shalbe taken by the said king ofDenmarke or any of his said lieges, the keeper of theprivie seale for ye time being, shall have power to maketo ye partie grieved letters of request under the privieseale, wtout any other pursuite to be made to any forrestitution to be had of ye goods so taken & to be taken.And if restitution be not made by such letters, the kingour soveraigne lord by the advise of his counsel shalprovide to the partie grieved his covenable remedy,according as ye case requireth.', "Libellus de politica conservatia Maris. Or, The Pollicy of keeping the Sea.Here beginneth the Prologue of the processe of the Libel of English policie, exhorting all England to keepe the sea, and namely the narrowe sea: shewing what profite commeth thereof, and also what worship and salvation to England, and to all English-men.THE true processe of English policie Of utterward to keepe this regne in Of our England, that no man may deny,Ner say of sooth but it is one of the best,Is this, that who seeth South, North, East and West,Cherish Marchandise, keepe the admiraltie;That we bee Masters of the narrowe see.For Sigismond the great Emperour,Wich yet reigneth, when he was in this landWith king Henry the fift, Prince of honour,Here much glory, as him thought, he found,A mightie land which had take in handTo werre in France, and make mortalitie,And ever well kept round about the see.And to the king thus hee sayd: My brother,(When hee perceived two Townes Caleis and Dover）Of all your Townes to chuse of one and other,To keepe the sea and soone to come overTo werre outwards and your regne to recover:Keepe these two Townes sure, and your MajesteeAs your tweyne eyne: so keepe the narrowe see.For if this sea bee kept in time of werre,Who can heere passe without danger and woe?Who may escape, who may mischiefe differre?What Marchandie may forby bee agoe?For needs hem must take trewes every foe:Flanders and Spaine, and other, trust to mee,Or ellis hindred all for this Narrow see.Therefore I cast mee by a little writingTo shewe at eye this conclusion,For conscience and for mine acquitingAgainst God and ageyne abusion,And cowardise, and to our enemies confusion.For foure things our Noble sheweth to me,King, Ship, and Swerd, and power of the see.Where ben our ships, where ben our swerds become?Our enemies bed for the ship set a sheepe.Alas our rule halteth, it is benome.Who dare well say that lordship should take keepe?I will assay, though mine heart ginne to weepe,To doe this werke, if wee will ever thee,For very shame to keepe about the see.Shall any Prince, what so be his name,Which hath Nobles moch leche ours,Bee Lord of see: and Flemings to our blame,Stop us, take us, and so make fade the flowersOf English state, and disteyne our honours?For cowardise alas it should so bee.Therefore I ginne to write nowe of the see. Of the commodities of Spaine and of Flanders. The first Chapter. KNOWE well all men that profits in certaineCommodities called comming out of Spaine And Marchandie, who so will weete what it is, Bene Figs, Raisins, wine Bastard, and Datis, And Licoris, Sivill oyle, and graine, White Pastill Sope, and Waxe is not vayne. Yron, Wooll, Wadmolle, Gotefell, Kidfell also: For Poynt-makers full needefull bene they tweyn: Saffron, Quickesilver, which owne Spaine Marchandy, Is into Flanders shipped full craftily, Unto Bruges as to her staple fayre: The Haven of Scluse hir Haven for her repayre Which is cleped Swyn tho shippes giding: Where many vessels and fayre are abiding. But these Marchandes with their shippes great, And such chaffare as they bye and get By the weyes must nede take on hand By the coasts to passe of our England, Betwixt Dover and Caleis, this is no doubt. Who can well els such matter bring about? And when these sayd Marchants discharged bee Of Marchandie in Flanders nere the see, Then they bee charged againe with Marchandy, That to Flanders bougeth full richly. Fine cloth of Ypre that named is better than ours, Cloth of Curtrike, fine cloth of all colours, Much Fustian, and also Linen cloth. But Flemings, if yee bee not wroth, The great substance of your cloth at the fullYee wot ye make it of our English woll. Then may it not sinke in mannis brayne, But that it must this Marchandy of Spaine Both out and in by our costes passe: Hee that sayd nay in witte was like an asse.Wee should have peace with the grounds tweyneThus if this see were kept, I dare well sayne.For Spaine and Flanders is as eche other brother,And nether may well live without other:They may not liven to maintaine their degrees,Without our English commodities:Wolle and Tynne: for the woolle of EnglandSusteineth the Commons Flemings I understand.Then if England would her wolle restraineFrom Flanders, this followeth in certaine,Flanders of nede must with us have peace,Or els shee is destroyed without lees.Also if Flanders thus destroyed bee:Some Marchandy of Spaine will never ythee:For destroyed it is, and as in cheeffeThe wolle of Spaine it commeth not to preeffe,But if it be costed and menged wellAmongst the English wolle the greter delle.For Spanish wooll in Flaunders draped is,And ever hath bee, that men have minde of this:And yet Wooll is one of the chiefe MarchandyThat longeth to Spaine: who so will espie,It is of little value, trust unto mee,With English wooll but if it menged bee.Thus if the sea be kept, than herken hether,If these two lands comen not together:So that the Fleete of Flanders passe noughtThat in the narrowe see it be not broughtInto the Rochelle to fetch the fumose wine,Ner into Bytonuse Bay for salt so fine,What is then Spaine? What is Flanders also?As who sayd, nought, the thrift is agoe.For the little land of Flanders isBut a staple to other lands ywis:And all that groweth in Flanders graine and seedeMay not a Moneth finde hem meate and brede.What hath then Flanders, bee Flemings lieffe or loth,But a little Mader and Flemish Cloth:By Drapering of our wooll in substanceLiven her commons, this is her governance,Without wich they may not live at ease.Thus must hem sterve, or with us must have peace.Of the commodities of Portugal. The second Chapter.  THE Marchandy also of Portugal  By divers lands turne into sale.  Portugalers with us have trouth in hand:  Whose Marchandy commeth much into England.  They ben our friends, with their commodities,  And wee English passen into their countrees.  Her land hath wine, Osey, Ware, and Graine,  Figges, Reysins, Hony and Cordoweyne:  Dates, and Salt, Hides, and such Marchandy:  And if they would to Flanders passe for by,  They should not bee suffred ones ner twyes,  For supporting of our cruell enemies,  That is to say Flemings with her gyle:  For changeable they are in little while.  Then I conclude by reasons many moe,  If we suffred neither friend nor foe,  What so enemies, and so supporting  Passe for by us in time of werring,  Seth our friends will not ben in cause  Of our hindring, if reson lede this clause:  Then nede from Flanders peace bee to us sought,  And other lands should seeke peace, dout nought:  For Flanders is Staple, as men tell mee,  To all nations of Christianitie.The commodities of pety Britaine, with her Rovers onthe sea. The third Chapter. FURTHERMORE to write I am faine Somewhat speaking of the little Britayne. Commoditie thereof there, is and was, Salt, and wine, crest cloth and canvas. And the land of Flaunders sickerly Is the staple of their Marchandy. Wich Marchandie may not passe away But by the coast of England, this is no nay. And of this Britaine, who so trueth lovis, Are the greatest rovers and the greatest theevis, That have bene in the sea many one yeere: That our Marchants have bought full dere. For they have tooke notable goods of ours, On this side see, these false pelours Called of Saincte Malo, and ellis where: Wich to their Duke none obeysance will bere: With such colours wee have bee hindred sore. And fayned peace is called no werre herefore. Thus they have bene in divers coasts many Of our England, more then rehearse can I: In Norfolke coastes, and other places about, And robbed and brent and slaine by many a rowte: And they have also ransomed Towne by Towne: That into the regnes of bost have run her sowne: Wich hath bin ruth unto this Realme and shame: They that the sea should keepe are much to blame. For Britayne is of easie reputation; And Saincte Malo turneth hem to reprobation.A storie of Edward the third his ordinance for Britayne. HERE bring I in a storie to mee lent, That a good Squire in time of Parliament Tooke unto mee well written in a scrowe: That I have commond both with high and lowe, Of which all men accorden into one, That it was done not many yeeres agone. But when noble King Edward the thrid Reigned in grace, right thus it betyd. For hee had a maner gelosie To his Marchants and loved them hartily. He feld the weyes to rule well the see, Whereby Marchants might have prosperitee. That for Harflew Houndflew did he maken; And great werre that time were undertaken, betwixt the King and the Duke of Britayne: At last to fall to peace both were they fayne: Upon the wich made with convencion Our Marchants made hem readie bowne Toward Britayne to loade their Marchandie, Wening hem friends they went foorth boldly: But soone anon our Marchants were ytake, And wee spedde never the better for truce sake. They lost her good, her navy and spending: But their complaint came unto the king. Then wext he wroth, and to the Duke he sent, And complained that such harme was hent; By convention and peace made so refused: Wich Duke sent againe, and him excused, Rehearsing that the mount of Saincte Michael, And Sainct Malo would never a dell Be subject unto his governance, Nor be under his obeysance: And so they did withouten him that deede. But when the king anon had taken heede: Hee in his herte set a judgement, Without calling of any Parliament, Or greate tarry to take long advise To fortifie anon he did devise Of English Townes three, that is to say, Dertmouth, Plymouth, the third it is Fowey: And gave hem helpe and notable puisance With insistence set them in governance Upon pety Bretayne for to werre. Those good sea men would no more differre, But bete hem home and made they might not rowte, Tooke prisoners, and made them for to lowte. And efte the Duke, an ensample wise, Wrote to the king as he first did devise, Him excusing: But our men wood With great power passed over the floode And werred foorth into the Dukes londe, And had ny destroyed free and bond. But than the Duke knewe that the townes three Should have lost all his native Countrie, He undertooke by suretie true not false, For mount Michael and Saincte Malo als, And other parties of the litle Brytaine, Which to obey, as sayd was, were not fayne. The Duke hymselfe for all did undertake: With all his herte a full peace did hee make: So that in all the life time of the king, Marchants had peace withouten werring: He made a statute for Lombards in this land, That they should in noe wise take on hande Here to inhabite, here to chardge and dischardge But fortie dayes, no more time had they large. This good king by witte of such appreiffe Kept his Marchants and the sea from mischiefe.Of the commodities of Scotland and draping of helwolles in Flanders. The fourth Chapiter. MOREOVER of Scotland the commodities Are Felles, Hides, and of Wooll the Fleese. And all these must passe by us away Into Flanders by England, sooth to say. And all her woolle was draped for to sell In the Townes of Poperinge and of Bell; Which my Lord of Glocester with ire For her falshed set upon a fire. And yet they of Bell and Poperinge Could never drape her wooll for any thing, But if they had English woll withall. Our goodly wooll which is so generall Needefull to them in Spaine and Scotland als, And other costes, this sentence is not false: Yee worthy Marchants I doe it upon you, I have this learned ye wot well where and howe: Ye wotte the Staple of that Marchandie, Of this Scotland is Flaunders sekerly. And the Scots bene charged knowen at the eye, Out of Flanders with little Mercerie, And great plentie of Haberdashers Ware, And halfe her shippes with cart wheeles bare, And with Barrowes are laden as in substance: Thus most rude ware are in her chevesance. So they may not forbeare this Flemish land. Therefore if wee would manly take in hand, To keepe this Sea from Flanders and from Spaine, And from Scotland, like as from pety Britaine, Wee should right soone have peace for all her bosts, For they must needes passe by our English costs.Of the commodities of Pruce, and High Dutch men,and Easterlings. The fifth Chapitle. NOWE goe foorth to the commodities, That commeth from Pruce in two maner degrees. For two maner people have such use, That is to say, High Duch men of Pruse, And Easterlings, which might not be forborne, Out of Flanders, but it were verely lorne. For they bring in the substance of the Beere, That they drinken feele too good chepe, not dere.Yee have heard that two Flemings togiderWill undertake or they goe any whither,Or they rise once to drinke a Ferkin full,Of good Beerekin: so sore they hall and pull.Under the board they pissen as they sit:This commeth of covenant of a worthie wit.Without Caleis in their Butter they cakkedWhen they fled home, and when they leysure lackedTo holde their siege, they went like as a Doe:Well was that Fleming that might trusse, and goe.For feare they turned backe and hyed fast,My Lord of Glocester made hem so agastWith his comming, and sought hem in her land,And brent and slowe as he had take on hand:So that our enemies durst not bide, nor stere,They fled to mewe, they durst no more appeare,Rebuked sore for ever so shamefully,Unto her utter everlasting villanie. Nowe Beere and Bakon bene fro Pruse ybroughtInto Flanders, as loved and farre ysought;Osmond, Copper, Bow-staves, Steele, and Wexe,Peltreware and grey Pitch, Terre, Board, and flexe:And Colleyne threed, Fustian and Canvas,Card, Bukeram: of olde time thus it was.But the Flemings among these things dere,In common loven best Bakon and Beere.Also Pruse men maken her adventureOf Plate of silver of wedges good and sureIn great plentie which they bring and bye,Out of the lands of Beame and Hungarie:Which is increase full great unto their land,And they bene laden, I understand,With wollen cloth all maner of coloursBy dyers crafted full divers, that ben ours.And they adventure full greatly unto the Bay,for salt that is needefull withouten nay.Thus if they would not our friends bee,We might lightly stoppe hem in the see:They should not passe our streemes withouten leve,It would not be, but if we should hem greve.Of the commodities of the Genuoys and her great Caracks. Chap. 6. THE Genuois comen in sundry wises Into this land with divers marchandises In great Caracks, arrayed withouten lacke With cloth of gold, silke, and pepper blacke They bring with them, and of crood great plentee, Woll Oyle, Woad ashen, by vessel in the see, Cotton, Rochalum, and good gold of Genne. And then be charged with wolle againe I wenne, And wollen cloth of ours of colours all. And they adventure, as ofte it doth befall, Into Flanders with such things as they bye, That is their chefe staple sekerly: And if they would be our full enemies, They should not passe our stremes with marchandise.The commodities and nicetees of the Venetians and Florentines, with their Gallees. Chap. 7.THE great Galees of Venice and Florence Be well laden with things of complacence, All spicery and of grossers ware: With sweete wines all maner of chaffare, Apes, and Japes, and marmusets tayled, Nifles and trifles that little have avayled: And things with which they fetely blere our eye: With things not induring that we bye. For much of this chaffare that is wastable Might be forborne for dere and deceivable. And that I wene as for infirmities In our England are such commodities Withouten helpe of any other lond Which by witte and practise both yfound: That all humors might be voyded sure, Which that we gleder with our English cure: That we should have no neede of Scamonie, Turbit, enforbe, correct Diagredie, Rubarbe, Sene, and yet they ben to needefull, But I know things al so speedefull, That growen here, as those things sayd. Let of this matter no man be dismayde; But that a man may voyde infirmitie Without degrees fet fro beyond the sea.And yef they should except be any thingIt were but sugre, trust to my saying:He that trusteth not to my saying and sentence,Let him better search experience.In this matter I will not ferther prease,Who so not beleeveth, let him leave and cease.Thus these galeys for this licking ware,And eating ware, bare hence our best chaffare:Cloth, woll, and tinne, which as I sayd before,Out of this lond worst might be forbore,For ech other land of necessitieHave great neede to buy some of them three:And we receive of hem into this costeWare and chaffare that lightly wilbe loste.And would Jesus, that our Lordis woldConsider this well both yong and old:Namely old that have experience,That might the yonge exhort to prudence;What harme, what hurt, and what hinderanceIs done to us, unto our great grievance,Of such lands, and of such nations:As experte men know by probations,By writings as discovered our counsailes,And false colour alwaies the countertailesOf our enimies; that doth us hinderingUnto our goods, our Relme, and to the king:As wise men have shewed well at eye;And all this is couloured by marchandye.  An example of deceite.ALSO they bere the gold out of this land,And sucke the thrift away out of our hand:As the Waspe souketh honie fro the bee,So minisheth our commoditee.Now wol ye here how they in CotteswoldWere wont to borrow or they shold be soldHer woll good as for yere and yere.Of cloth and tinne they did in like manere:And in her galies ship this marchandie:Then soone at Venice of them men woll it bye.Then utterne there the chaffare by the peise,And lightly als there they make her reise.And when the goods beene at Venice sold,Then to carie her change they this money have,They will it profer, their subtiltie to save,To English marchants to yeve it out by eschangeTo be payed againe they make not strange,At the receiving and sight of a letter,Here in England, seeming for the better,by foure pence lesse in the noble round:That is twelve pence in the golden pound.And if wee wol have of paymentA full moneth, than must him needes assentTo eight pence losse, that is shillings twaineIn the English pound; as eft soone againe,For two moneths twelve pence must he pay.In the English pound what is that to say,But shillings three? So that in pound fellFor hurt and harme hard is with hem to dwell.And when English marchants have contentThis eschange in England of assent,That these sayd Venecians have in wooneAnd Florentines to bere her gold sooneOver the see into Flanders againe:And thus they live in Flanders, sooth to saine,And in London with such chevisance,That men call usury, to our losse and hinderance. Another example of deceite. Now lesten well how they made us a valeys When they borrowed at the town of Caleis As they were wont, their woll that was hem lent, For yere and yere they should make payment. And sometime als two yere and two yeare. This was fayre love: but yet will ye heare, How they to Bruges would her woll carie, And for hem take payment withouten tarie, And sell it fast for ready money in hand. For fifty pounds of money of losse they wold not wond In a thousand pound, and live thereby Till the day of payment easily, Come againe in exchange: making Full like usury, as men make undertaking.Than whan this payment of a thousand poundWas well content, they should have chaffare soundIf they wold fro the Staple full,Receive againe three thousand pound in woll. In Cotteswold also they ride about, And all England, and buy withouten doubte What them list with freedome and franchise, More then we English may gitten many wise. But would God that without lenger delayes These galees were unfraught in fortie dayes, And in fortie dayes charged againe, And that they might be put to certaine To goe to oste, as we there with hem doe. It were expedient that they did right soe, As we doe there. If the king would it: Ah what worship wold fall to English wit? What profite also to our marchandie Which wold of nede be cherished hertilie? For I would witte, why now our navie fayleth, When manie a foe us at our doore assayleth. Now in these dayes, that if there come a nede, What navie should we have it is to drede. In Denmarke were full noble conquerours In time past, full worthy warriours: Which when they had their marchants destroyed, To poverty they fell, thus were they noyed: And so they stand at mischiefe at this day. This learned I late well writon, this no nay. Therefore beware, I can no better will, If grace it woll, of other mennis perill. For if marchants were cherished to her speede, We were not likely to fayle in any neede. If they be rich, then in prosperitee Shalbe our londe, lords, and commontee, And in worship. Now thinke I on the sonne Of marchandy Richard of Whitingdon; That load sterre, and chiefe chosen floure: What hath by him our England of honour, And what profite hath bin of his riches, And yet lasteth dayly in worthines? That pen and paper may not me suffice Him to describe: so high he was of price Above marchants, that set him one of the best: I can no more, but God have him in rest.  Now the principal matter. WHAT reason is it that we should goe to oste In their countries, & in this English costeThey should not so? but have more libertyThen we our selves now also motte I thee.I would to gifts men should take no heedeThat letteth our thing publicke for to speede.For this we see well every day at eye,Gifts and fests stopen our policie.Now see that fooles ben either they or wee:But ever we have the worse in this countree.Therefore let hem unto oste go here,Or be we free with hem in like manereIn their countrees: and if it will not bee,Compell them unto oste, and yee shall seeMoch avantage, and moch profite arise,Moch more then I can write in any wise.  Of our charge and discharge at her marts.CONCEIVE wel here, that Englishmen at martesBe discharged, for all her craftes and artes,In Brabant of her marchandyIn fourteene dayes, and ageine hastilyIn the same dayes fourteene acharged eft.And if they bide lenger all is bereft,Anon they should forfeit her goods all,Or marchandy: it should no better fall.And we to martis in Brabant charged beeneWith English cloth full good and fayre to seene:We ben againe charged with mercerie,Haburdasher ware, and with grosserie:To which marts, that English men call fayres,Ech nation oft maketh her repayres:English, and French, Lombards, Jennoyes,Catalones, thedre they take her wayes:Scots, Spaniards, Irishmen there abides,With great plenty bringing of sale hides.And I here say that we in Brabant bye,Flanders and Zeland more of marchandyIn common use then done all other nations:This have I heard of marchants relations:And if the English ben not in the martsThey ben feeble, and as nought bene her parts.For they byemore, and fro purse put outMore marchandie then all the other rowte.Kept then the see, shippes should not bring ne fetch,And then the carreys wold not thidre stretch: And so those marts wold full evill thee, If we manly kept about the see. Of the commodities of Brabant and Zeland and Henauld and marchandy carried by land to the martes. Cap. 8. YET marchandy of Brabant and Zeland The Madre and Woad, that dyers take on hand To dyen with, Garlike and Onions, And saltfishe als for husband and commons. But they of Holland at Caleis byen our felles, And wolles our, that Englishmen hem selles. And the chaffare that Englishmen doe byen In the marts, that noe man may denien, Is not made in Brabant that cuntree: It commeth from out of Henauld, not by see, But al by land, by carts, and from France, Bourgoyne, Colein, Cameret in substance, Therefore at marts if there be a restraint, Men seyne plainely that list no fables paynt, If Englishmen be withdrawen away, Is great rebuke and losse to her affray: As though we sent into the land of France Ten thousand people, men of good puissance, To werre unto her hindring multifarie, So ben our English marchants necessarie. If it be thus assay, and we shall witten Of men experte, by whom I have this written. For sayd is that this carted marchandy Draweth in value as much verily, As all the goods that come in shippes thider, Which Englishmen bye most and bring it hither. For her marts ben febel, shame to say, But Englishmen thider dresse her way. A conclusion of this depending of keeping of the sea.THAN I conclude, if never so much by landWere by carres brought unto their hand,If well the sea were kept in governanceThey should by sea have no deliverance.Wee should hem stop, and we should hem destroy,As prisoners we should hem bring to annoy.And so we should of our cruell enimiesMake our friends for feare of marchandies,If they were not suffered for to passeInto Flanders. But we be frayle as glasseAnd also brittle, not thought never abiding;But when grace shineth soone are we sliding;We will it not receive in any wise:That maken lust, envie, and covetise:Expone me this; and yee shall sooth it find,Bere it away, and keepe it in your mind.Then shuld worship unto our Noble beeIn feate and forme to lord and Majestie:Liche as the seale the greatest of this landOn the one side hath, as I understand,A prince riding with his swerd ydraw,In the other side sitting, soth it is in saw,Betokening good rule and punishingIn very deede of England by the king.And it is so, God blessed mought he bee.So in likewise I would were on the seeBy the Noble, that swerde should have power,And the ships on the sea about us here.What needeth a garland which is made of IvieShewe a taverne winelesse, also thrive I?If men were wise, the Frenchmen and FlemingShuld bere no state in sea by werring.Then Hankin lyons shuld not be so boldTo stoppe wine, and shippes for to holdUnto our shame. He had be beten thence.Alas, alas, why did we this offence,Fully to shend the old English fames;And the profits of England, and their names:Why is this power called of covetise;With false colours cast beforn our eyes?That if good men called werrioursWould take in hand for the commons succours,To purge the sea unto our great avayle,And winne hem goods, and have up the sayle,And on our enimies their lives to impart,So that they might their prises well departe,As reson wold, justice and equitie;To make this land have lordship of the sea.Then shall Lombards and other fained friendsMake their chalenges by colour false offends,And say their chaffare in the shippes is,And chalenge al. Looke if this be amisse.For thus may al that men have bought to sore,Ben soone excused, and saved by false colour.Beware ye men that bere the great in handThat they destroy the policie of this land,By gifte and good, and the fine golden clothis,And silke, and other: say yee not this soth is?But if we had very experienceThat they take meede with privie violence,Carpets, and things of price and pleasance,Whereby stopped should be good governance:And if it were as yee say to mee,Than wold I say, alas cupiditie,That they that have her lives put in drede,Shalbe soone out of winning, all for meed,And lose her costes, and brought to poverty,That they shall never have lust to goe to sea.An exhortation to make an ordinance against colour ofmaintainers and excusers of folkes goods. FOR this colour that must be sayd alofte And be declared of the great full ofte, That our seamen wol by many wise Spoile our friends in steede of our enimies: For which colour and Lombards maintenance, The king it needes to make an ordinance With his Counsayle that may not fayle, I trowe, That friends should from enimies be knowe, Our enimies taken and our friends spared: The remedy of hem must be declared. Thus may the sea be kept in no sell, For if ought be spoken, wot yee well, We have the strokes, and enemies have the winning: But mayntainers are parteners of the finning. We live in lust and bide in covetise: This is our rule to maintaine marchandise, And policie that wee have on the sea. And, but God helpe, it will no other bee.Of the commodities of Ireland, and policie and keeping thereof, and conquering of wild Irish: with an incident of Wales. Chap. 9.  I CAST to speake of Ireland but a litle: Commodities of it I will entitle,Hides, and fish, Salmon, Hake, Herringe,Irish wooll, and linen cloth, faldinge,And marterns goode ben her marchandie,Hertes Hides, and other of Venerie.Skinnes of Otter, Squirell and Irish hare,Of sheepe, lambe, and Foxe, is her chaffare,Felles of Kiddes, and Conies great plentie.So that if Ireland helpe us to keepe the sea,Because the King cleped is Rex Angliae,And is Dominus also Hyberniae,Old possessed by Progenitours:The Irish men have cause like to oursOur land and hers together to defend,That no enemie should hurt ne offend,Ireland ne us: but as one commontieShould helpe well to keepe about the sea:For they have havens great, and goodly bayes,Sure, wyde and deepe, of good assayes,At Waterford, and costes many one.And as men sayne in England be there noneBetter havens, ships in to ride,No more sure for enemies to abide.Why speake I thus so much of Ireland?For all so much as I can understand,It is fertile for things that there doe groweAnd multiplien, loke who lust to knowe,So large, so good, and so commodious,That to declare is strange and marvailous.For of silver and golde there is the oore,Among the wilde Irish though they be poore.For they are rude and can thereon no skill:So that if we had their peace and good willTo myne and fine, and metal for to pure,In wilde Irish might we finde the cure,As in London saith a Juellere,Which brought from thence golde oore to us here,Whereof was fyned mettal goode and clene,As they touch, no better could be seene.Nowe here beware and heartily take intent,As yee will answere at last judgement,That for slought and for racheshedeYee remember with all your might to hedeTo keepe Ireland that it be not lost.For it is a boterasse and a post, Under England, and Wales another: God forbid, but ech were others brothers Of one ligeance due unto the king. But I have pittie in good faith of this thing That I shall say with avisement: I am aferde that Ireland will be shent: It must awey, it wol bee lost from us, But if thou helpe, thou Jesu gracious, And give us grace al slought to leve beside. For much thing in my herte is hide, Which in another treatise I caste to write Made al onely for that soile and site, Of fertile Ireland, wich might not be forborne, But if England were nigh as goode as gone. God forbid that a wild Irish wirlinge Should be chosen for to bee their kinge, After her conqueste for our last puissance, And hinder us by other lands alliance. Wise men seyn, wich felin not, ne douten, That wild Irish so much of ground have gotten There upon us, as likenesse may be Like as England to sheeris two or three Of this our land is made comparable: So wild Irish have wonne on us unable Yet to defend, and of none power, That our ground is there a litle corner, To all Ireland in true comparison. It needeth no more this matter to expon. Which if it bee lost, as Christ Jesu forbed, Farewel Wales, then England commeth to dred, For aliance of Scotland and of Spaine, And other moe, as the pety Bretaine, And so have enemies environ round about. I beseech God, that some prayers devout Mutt let the said apparance probable Thus disposed without feyned fable. But all onely for perill that I see Thus imminent, it's likely for to bee. And well I wotte, that from hence to Rome, And, as men say, in all Christendome, Is no ground ne land to Ireland liche, So large, so good, so plenteous, so riche, That to this worde Dominus doe long. Then mee semeth that right were and no wrong, To get the lande: and it were piteous To us to lese this high name Dominus. And all this word Dominus of name Shuld have the ground obeysant wilde and tame. That name and people togidre might accord Al the ground subject to the Lord. And that it is possible to bee subject, Unto the king wel shal it bee detect, In the litle booke that I of spake. I trowe reson al this wol undertake. And I knowe wel howe it stante, Alas fortune beginneth so to scant, Or ellis grace, that deade is governance. For so minisheth parties of our puissance, In that land that wee lese every yere, More ground and more, as well as yee may here. I herd a man speake to mee full late. Which was a lord of full great estate; Than expense of one yere done in France Werred on men well willed of puissance This said ground of Ireland to conquere. And yet because England might not forbere These said expenses gadred in one yeere, But in three yeeres or foure gadred up here, Might winne Ireland to a finall conqueste, In one sole yeere to set us all at reste. And how soone wolde this be paied ageyne: Which were it worth yerely, if wee not feyne: I wol declare, who so luste to looke, I trowe full plainely in my litle booke. But covetise, and singularitie Of owne profite, envie, crueltie, Hath doon us harme, and doe us every day, And musters made that shame is to say: Our money spent al to litle availe, And our enimies so greatly doone prevaile, That what harme may fall and overthwerte I may unneth write more for sore of herte. An exhortation to the keeping of Wales.BEWARE of Wales, Christ Jesu mutt us keepe,That it make not our childers childe to weepe,Ne us also, so if it goe his way,By unwarenes: seth that many a day Men have bee ferde of her rebellion, By great tokens and ostentation: Seche the meanes with a discrete avise, And helpe that they rudely not arise For to rebell, that Christ it forbede. Looke wel aboute, for God wote yee have neede, Unfainingly, unfeyning and unfeynt, That conscience for slought you not atteynt: Kepe well that grounde, for harme that may ben used, Or afore God mutte yee ben accused.Of the commodious Stockfish of Island, and keeping of the Sea, namely the Narrow sea, with an incident of the keeping of Caleis. Chap. 10. OF Island to write is litle nede, Save of Stock-fish: Yet forsooth in deed Out of Bristowe, and costes many one, Men have practised by nedle and by stone Thider wardes within a litle while, Within twelve yere, and without perill Gon and come, as men were wont of old Of Scarborough unto the costes cold. And nowe so fele shippes this yeere there ware, That moch losse for unfreyght they bare: Island might not make hem to bee fraught Unto the Hawys: thus much harme they caught. Then here I ende of the commoditees For which neede is well to kepe the seas: Este and Weste, South and North they bee. And chiefly kepe the sharpe narrow see, Betweene Dover and Caleis: and as thus that foes passe none without good will of us: And they abide our danger in the length, What for our costis and Caleis in our strength. An exhortation for the sure keeping of Caleis. AND for the love of God, and of his blisse Cherish yee Caleis better then it is. See well thereto, and heare the grete complaint That true men tellen, that woll no lies paint, And as yee know that writing commeth from thence: Doe not to England for slought so great offence, But that redressed it bee for any thing: Leste a song of sorrow that wee sing. For litle wenith the foole who so might chese What harme it were good Caleis for to lese: What wo it were for all this English ground. Which wel conceived the Emperour Sigismound, That of all joyes made it one of the moste, That Caleis was subject unto English coste. Him thought it was a jewel most of all, And so the same in Latine did it call. And if yee wol more of Caleis heare and knowe, I cast to write within a litle scrowe, Like as I have done before by and by In other parteis of our policie. Loke how hard it was at the first to get; And by my counsell lightly doe not it let. For if wee lese it with shame of face Wilfully, it is for lacke of grace. Howe was Harflew cried upon, and Rone, That they were likely for shought to be gone; Howe was it warned and cried on in England, I make record with this pen in my hand. It was warened plainely in Normandie, And in England, and I thereon did crie. The world was defrauded, it betyde right so. Farewell Harflew: lewdly it was a go. Nowe ware Caleis, I can say no better: My soule discharge I by this present letter.After the Chapitles of commodities of divers lands, sheweth the conclusion of keeping of the sea environ, by a storie of King Edgar and two incidents of King Edward the third, and King Henrie the fifth. Chap. 11. NOWE see we well then that this round see To our Noble by pariformitee Under the ship shewed there the sayle, And our king with royal apparayle, With swerd drawen bright and extent For to chastise enimies violent; Should be lord of the sea about, To keepe enimies from within and without; To behold through Christianitee Master and lord environ of the see: All living men such a prince to dreed, Of such a regne to bee aferd indeed. Thus prove I well that it was thus of old; Which by a Chronicle anon shalbe told, Right curious: but I will interprete It into English, as I did it gete: Of king Edgar: O most marvellous Prince living, wittie, and chevalerous: So good that none of his predecessours Was to him liche in prudence and honours. Hee was fortunate and more gracious Then other before, and more glorious: He was beneth no man in holines: Hee passed all in vertuous sweetnes. Of English kings was none so commendable: To English men no lesse memorable, Then Cyrus was to Perse by puissance, And as great Charles was to them of France, And as to the Romanes was great Romulus, So was to England this worthy Edgarus. I may not write more of his worthines For lacke of time, ne of his holines: But to my matter I him exemplifie, Of conditions tweyne and of his policie: Within his land was one, this is no doubt, And another in the see without; That in time of Winter and of werre, When boystrous windes put see men into fere; Within his land about by all provinces Hee passed through, perceiving his princes, Lords, and others of the commontee, Who was oppressour, and who to povertee Was drawen and brought, and who was clene in life, And was by mischiefe and by strife With over leding and extortion: And good and badde of eche condition Hee aspied: and his ministers als, Who did trought, and which of hem was fals: Howe the right and lawes of the land Were execute, and who durst take in hand To disobey his statutes and decrees, If they were well kept in all countrees: Of these he made subtile investigation Of his owne espie, and other mens relation. Among other was his great busines, Well to ben ware, that great men of riches, And men of might in citie nor in towne Should to the poore doe non oppression. Thus was hee wont in this Winter tide On such enforchise busily to abide. This was his labour for the publike thing, Thus was hee occupied: a passing holy King. Nowe to purpose, in the Sommer faire Of lusty season, whan clered was the aire, He had redie shippes made before Great and huge, not fewe but many a store: Full three thousand and sixe hundred also Stately inough on our sea to goe. The Chronicles say, these shippes were full boysteous: Such things long to kings victorious. In Sommer tide would hee have in wonne And in custome to be ful redie soone, With multitude of men of good array And instruments of werre of best assay. Who could hem well in any wise descrive? It were not light for eny man alive. Thus he and his would enter shippes great Habiliments having and the fleete Of See werres, that joyfull was to see Such a navie and Lord of Majestee, There present in person hem among To saile and rowe environ all along, So regal liche about the English isle; To all strangers terrours and perile. Whose fame went about in all the world stout, Unto great fere of all that be without, And exercise to Knights and his meynee To him longing of his natall cuntree. For courage of nede must have exercise, Thus occupied for esshewin of vice. This knew the king that policie espied; Winter and Somer he was thus occupied. Thus conclude I by authoritee Of Chronike, that environ the see Should bene our subjects unto the King, And hee bee Lord thereof for eny thing: For great worship and for profite alsoTo defend his land fro every foo.That worthy king I leve, Edgar by name,And all the Chronike of his worthy fame: Saffe onely this I may not passe away, A worde of mighty strength till that I say, That graunted him God such worship here, For his merites, hee was without pere, That sometime at his great festivitee Kings, and Erles of many a countree, And princes fele were there present, And many Lords came thider by assent, To his worship: but in a certaine day Hee bad shippes to bee redie of aray: For to visit Saint Johns Church hee list Rowing unto the good holie Baptist, Hee assigned to Erles, Lords, and knights Many ships right godly to sights: And for himselfe and eight kings moo Subject to him hee made kepe one of thoo, A good shippe, and entrede into it With eight kings, and downe did they sit; And eche of them an ore tooke in hand, At ore hales, as I understand, And he himselfe at the shippe behinde As steris man it became of kinde. Such another rowing I dare well say, Was not seene of Princes many a day. Lo than how hee in waters got the price, In lande, in see, that I may not suffice To tell, 0 right, 0 magnanimitee, That king Edgar had upon the see.An incident of the Lord of the sea King Edward the third. OF king Edward I passe and his prowes On lande, on sea yee knowe his worthines: The siege of Caleis, ye know well all the matter Round about by land, and by the water, Howe it lasted not yeeres many agoe, After the battell of Crecye was ydoe: Howe it was closed environ about, Olde men sawe it, which liven, this is no doubt. Old Knights say that the Duke of Burgoyn, Late rebuked for all his golden coyne; Of ship on see made no besieging there, For want of shippes that durst not come for feare. It was nothing besieged by the see: Thus call they it no siege for honestee. Gonnes assailed, but assault was there none, No siege, but fuge: well was he that might be gone: This maner carping have knights ferre in age, Expert through age of this maner language. But king Edward made a siege royall, And wanne the towne: and in especiall The sea was kept, and thereof he was Lord. Thus made he Nobles coyned of record; In whose time was no navie on the see That might withstand his majestie. Battell of Scluse yee may rede every day, Howe it was done I leve and goe my way: It was so late done that yee it knowe, In comparison within a litle throwe: For which to God give we honour and glorie; For Lord of see the king was with victorie.Another incident of keeping of the see, in the time of the marveilous werriour and victorious Prince, King Henrie the fifth, and of his great shippes. AND if I should conclude all by the King Henrie the fift, what was his purposing, Whan at Hampton he made the great dromons, Which passed other great ships of all the commons; The Trinitie, the Grace de Dieu, the holy Ghost, And other moe, which as nowe bee lost. What hope ye was the kings great intent Of thoo shippes, and what in minde hee meant? It was not ellis, but that hee cast to bee Lorde round about environ of the see. And when Harflew had her siege about, There came caracks horrible great and stoute In the narrow see willing to abide, To stoppe us there with multitude of pride. My Lord of Bedford came on and had the cure, Destroyed they were by that discomfiture. This was after the king Harflew had wonne,Whan our enemies to siege had begonne; That all was slaine or take, by true relation, To his worshippe, and of his English nation. There was present the kings chamberlaine At both battailes; which knoweth this in certaine; He can it tell otherwise then I: Aske him, and witte; I passe foorth hastily. What had this king of his magnificence, Of great courage, of wisedome, and prudence? Provision, forewitte, audacitee, Of fortitude, justice, and agilitee, Discretion, subtile avisednesse, Attemperance, Noblesse, and worthinesse: Science, prowesse, devotion, equitie, Of most estate, with his magnanimitie Liche to Edgar, and the saide Edward, As much of both liche hem as in regard. Where was on live a man more victorious, And in so short time prince so marveilous? By land and sea, so well he him acquitte, To speake of him I stony in my witte. Thus here I leave the king with his noblesse, Henry the fift, with whom all my processe Of this true booke of pure policie Of sea keeping, entending victorie I leave endly: for about in the see No Prince was of better strenuitee. And if he had to this time lived here, He had bene Prince named withouten pere: His great ships should have ben put in preefe, Unto the ende that he ment of in cheefe, For doubt it not but that he would have bee Lord and master about the round see: And kept it sure to stoppe our enemies hence, And wonne us good, and wisely brought it thence: That no passage should be without danger, And his licence on see to move and sterre.Of unitie, shewing of our keeping of the see: with an endly or finall processe of peace by authoritie. Chap. 12. Now than for love of Christ, and of his joy, Bring it England out of trouble and noy: Take heart and witte, and set a governance, Set many wits withouten variance, To one accord and unanimitee. Put to good will for to keepe the see, First for worship and profite also, And to rebuke of eche evill willed foe. Thus shall worship and riches to us long. Than to the Noble shall we doe no wrong, To beare that coyne in figure and in deede, To our courage, and to our enemies dreede:For which they must dresse hem to peace in haste,Or ellis their thrift to standen, and to waste.As this processe hath proved by and byAll by reason and expert policy;And by stories which proved well this parte:Or ellis I will my life put in jeoparte,But many londs would seche her peace for nede,The see wel kept: it must bee doo for drede.Thus must Flanders for nede have uniteeAnd peace with us: it will non other bee,Within short while: and ambassadoursWould bene here soone to treate for their succours.This unitee is to God pleasance:And peace after the werres variance.The ende of battaile is peace sikerly,And power causeth peace finally.Kept than the sea about in speciall,Which of England is the towne wall.As though England were likened to a citie,And the wall environ were the see.Kepe then the sea that is the wall of England:And than is England kept by Goddes hande;That as for any thing that is without,England were at ease withouten doubt,And thus should every lond one with anotherEntercommon, as brother with his brother,And live togither werrelesse in unitie,Without rancour in very charitie,In rest and peace, to Christes great pleasance,Without strife, debate and variance.Which peace men should enserche with businesse,And knit it saddely holding in holinesse.The Apostle seith, if ye list to see,Bee yee busie for to keepe uniteeOf the spirit in the bond of peace.Which is nedeful to all withouten lese.The Prophet biddeth us peace for to enquireTo pursue it, this is holy desire.Our Lord Jesu saith, Blessed motte they beeThat maken peace; that is tranquillitee.For peace makers, as Matthew writeth aright,Should be called the sonnes of God almight.God give us grace, the weyes for to keepe Of his precepts, and slugly not to sleepe In shame of sinne: that our verry foo Might be to us convers, and turned so. For in the Proverbs is a text to this purpose Plaine inough without any glose: When mens weyes please unto our Lord, It shall convert and bring to accord Mans enemies unto peace verray, In unitie, to live to Goddis pay, With unitie, peace, rest and charitie. Hee that was here cladde in humanitie, That came from heaven, and styed up with our nature, Or hee ascended, he yave to us cure, And left with us peace, ageyne striffe and debate, Mote give us peace, so well irradicate Here in this world: that after all this feste Wee may have peace in the land of beheste, Jerusalem, which of peace is the sight, With his brightnes of eternall light, There glorified in rest with his tuition, The Deitie to see with full fruition: Hee second person in divinenesse is, Who us assume, and bring us to the blis. Amen.Here endeth the true processe of the Libel of English policie, exhorting all England to keepe the sea environ: shewing what profit and salvation, with worship commeth thereof to the reigne of England. GOE furth Libelle, and meekely shew thy face;Appearing ever with humble countenance:And pray my Lords to take in grace,In opposaile and cherishing the advance.To hardines if that not varianceThou hast fro trought by full experienceAuthors and reasons: if ought faile in substanceRemit to hem that yafe thee this science;That seth it is soth in verry fayth,That the wise Lord Baron of HungerfordHath thee overseene, and verely he saithThat thou art true, and thus hee doeth record,Next the Gospel: God wotte it was his worde,When hee thee redde all over in a night.Goe forth trew booke, and Christ defend thy right. Explicit libellus de Politia conservativa maris.", 'Here beginneth the Prologue of the processe of the Libel of English policie, exhorting all England to keepe the sea, and namely the narrowe sea: shewing what profite commeth thereof, and also what worship and salvation to England, and to all English-men.THE true processe of English policie Of utterward to keepe this regne in Of our England, that no man may deny,Ner say of sooth but it is one of the best,Is this, that who seeth South, North, East and West,Cherish Marchandise, keepe the admiraltie;That we bee Masters of the narrowe see.For Sigismond the great Emperour,Wich yet reigneth, when he was in this landWith king Henry the fift, Prince of honour,Here much glory, as him thought, he found,A mightie land which had take in handTo werre in France, and make mortalitie,And ever well kept round about the see.And to the king thus hee sayd: My brother,(When hee perceived two Townes Caleis and Dover）Of all your Townes to chuse of one and other,To keepe the sea and soone to come overTo werre outwards and your regne to recover:Keepe these two Townes sure, and your MajesteeAs your tweyne eyne: so keepe the narrowe see.For if this sea bee kept in time of werre,Who can heere passe without danger and woe?Who may escape, who may mischiefe differre?What Marchandie may forby bee agoe?For needs hem must take trewes every foe:Flanders and Spaine, and other, trust to mee,Or ellis hindred all for this Narrow see.Therefore I cast mee by a little writingTo shewe at eye this conclusion,For conscience and for mine acquitingAgainst God and ageyne abusion,And cowardise, and to our enemies confusion.For foure things our Noble sheweth to me,King, Ship, and Swerd, and power of the see.Where ben our ships, where ben our swerds become?Our enemies bed for the ship set a sheepe.Alas our rule halteth, it is benome.Who dare well say that lordship should take keepe?I will assay, though mine heart ginne to weepe,To doe this werke, if wee will ever thee,For very shame to keepe about the see.Shall any Prince, what so be his name,Which hath Nobles moch leche ours,Bee Lord of see: and Flemings to our blame,Stop us, take us, and so make fade the flowersOf English state, and disteyne our honours?For cowardise alas it should so bee.Therefore I ginne to write nowe of the see.', 'Of the commodities of Spaine and of Flanders. The first Chapter. KNOWE well all men that profits in certaineCommodities called comming out of Spaine And Marchandie, who so will weete what it is, Bene Figs, Raisins, wine Bastard, and Datis, And Licoris, Sivill oyle, and graine, White Pastill Sope, and Waxe is not vayne. Yron, Wooll, Wadmolle, Gotefell, Kidfell also: For Poynt-makers full needefull bene they tweyn: Saffron, Quickesilver, which owne Spaine Marchandy, Is into Flanders shipped full craftily, Unto Bruges as to her staple fayre: The Haven of Scluse hir Haven for her repayre Which is cleped Swyn tho shippes giding: Where many vessels and fayre are abiding. But these Marchandes with their shippes great, And such chaffare as they bye and get By the weyes must nede take on hand By the coasts to passe of our England, Betwixt Dover and Caleis, this is no doubt. Who can well els such matter bring about? And when these sayd Marchants discharged bee Of Marchandie in Flanders nere the see, Then they bee charged againe with Marchandy, That to Flanders bougeth full richly. Fine cloth of Ypre that named is better than ours, Cloth of Curtrike, fine cloth of all colours, Much Fustian, and also Linen cloth. But Flemings, if yee bee not wroth, The great substance of your cloth at the fullYee wot ye make it of our English woll. Then may it not sinke in mannis brayne, But that it must this Marchandy of Spaine Both out and in by our costes passe: Hee that sayd nay in witte was like an asse.Wee should have peace with the grounds tweyneThus if this see were kept, I dare well sayne.For Spaine and Flanders is as eche other brother,And nether may well live without other:They may not liven to maintaine their degrees,Without our English commodities:Wolle and Tynne: for the woolle of EnglandSusteineth the Commons Flemings I understand.Then if England would her wolle restraineFrom Flanders, this followeth in certaine,Flanders of nede must with us have peace,Or els shee is destroyed without lees.Also if Flanders thus destroyed bee:Some Marchandy of Spaine will never ythee:For destroyed it is, and as in cheeffeThe wolle of Spaine it commeth not to preeffe,But if it be costed and menged wellAmongst the English wolle the greter delle.For Spanish wooll in Flaunders draped is,And ever hath bee, that men have minde of this:And yet Wooll is one of the chiefe MarchandyThat longeth to Spaine: who so will espie,It is of little value, trust unto mee,With English wooll but if it menged bee.Thus if the sea be kept, than herken hether,If these two lands comen not together:So that the Fleete of Flanders passe noughtThat in the narrowe see it be not broughtInto the Rochelle to fetch the fumose wine,Ner into Bytonuse Bay for salt so fine,What is then Spaine? What is Flanders also?As who sayd, nought, the thrift is agoe.For the little land of Flanders isBut a staple to other lands ywis:And all that groweth in Flanders graine and seedeMay not a Moneth finde hem meate and brede.What hath then Flanders, bee Flemings lieffe or loth,But a little Mader and Flemish Cloth:By Drapering of our wooll in substanceLiven her commons, this is her governance,Without wich they may not live at ease.Thus must hem sterve, or with us must have peace.', 'Of the commodities of Portugal. The second Chapter.  THE Marchandy also of Portugal  By divers lands turne into sale.  Portugalers with us have trouth in hand:  Whose Marchandy commeth much into England.  They ben our friends, with their commodities,  And wee English passen into their countrees.  Her land hath wine, Osey, Ware, and Graine,  Figges, Reysins, Hony and Cordoweyne:  Dates, and Salt, Hides, and such Marchandy:  And if they would to Flanders passe for by,  They should not bee suffred ones ner twyes,  For supporting of our cruell enemies,  That is to say Flemings with her gyle:  For changeable they are in little while.  Then I conclude by reasons many moe,  If we suffred neither friend nor foe,  What so enemies, and so supporting  Passe for by us in time of werring,  Seth our friends will not ben in cause  Of our hindring, if reson lede this clause:  Then nede from Flanders peace bee to us sought,  And other lands should seeke peace, dout nought:  For Flanders is Staple, as men tell mee,  To all nations of Christianitie.', 'The commodities of pety Britaine, with her Rovers onthe sea. The third Chapter. FURTHERMORE to write I am faine Somewhat speaking of the little Britayne. Commoditie thereof there, is and was, Salt, and wine, crest cloth and canvas. And the land of Flaunders sickerly Is the staple of their Marchandy. Wich Marchandie may not passe away But by the coast of England, this is no nay. And of this Britaine, who so trueth lovis, Are the greatest rovers and the greatest theevis, That have bene in the sea many one yeere: That our Marchants have bought full dere. For they have tooke notable goods of ours, On this side see, these false pelours Called of Saincte Malo, and ellis where: Wich to their Duke none obeysance will bere: With such colours wee have bee hindred sore. And fayned peace is called no werre herefore. Thus they have bene in divers coasts many Of our England, more then rehearse can I: In Norfolke coastes, and other places about, And robbed and brent and slaine by many a rowte: And they have also ransomed Towne by Towne: That into the regnes of bost have run her sowne: Wich hath bin ruth unto this Realme and shame: They that the sea should keepe are much to blame. For Britayne is of easie reputation; And Saincte Malo turneth hem to reprobation.A storie of Edward the third his ordinance for Britayne. HERE bring I in a storie to mee lent, That a good Squire in time of Parliament Tooke unto mee well written in a scrowe: That I have commond both with high and lowe, Of which all men accorden into one, That it was done not many yeeres agone. But when noble King Edward the thrid Reigned in grace, right thus it betyd. For hee had a maner gelosie To his Marchants and loved them hartily. He feld the weyes to rule well the see, Whereby Marchants might have prosperitee. That for Harflew Houndflew did he maken; And great werre that time were undertaken, betwixt the King and the Duke of Britayne: At last to fall to peace both were they fayne: Upon the wich made with convencion Our Marchants made hem readie bowne Toward Britayne to loade their Marchandie, Wening hem friends they went foorth boldly: But soone anon our Marchants were ytake, And wee spedde never the better for truce sake. They lost her good, her navy and spending: But their complaint came unto the king. Then wext he wroth, and to the Duke he sent, And complained that such harme was hent; By convention and peace made so refused: Wich Duke sent againe, and him excused, Rehearsing that the mount of Saincte Michael, And Sainct Malo would never a dell Be subject unto his governance, Nor be under his obeysance: And so they did withouten him that deede. But when the king anon had taken heede: Hee in his herte set a judgement, Without calling of any Parliament, Or greate tarry to take long advise To fortifie anon he did devise Of English Townes three, that is to say, Dertmouth, Plymouth, the third it is Fowey: And gave hem helpe and notable puisance With insistence set them in governance Upon pety Bretayne for to werre. Those good sea men would no more differre, But bete hem home and made they might not rowte, Tooke prisoners, and made them for to lowte. And efte the Duke, an ensample wise, Wrote to the king as he first did devise, Him excusing: But our men wood With great power passed over the floode And werred foorth into the Dukes londe, And had ny destroyed free and bond. But than the Duke knewe that the townes three Should have lost all his native Countrie, He undertooke by suretie true not false, For mount Michael and Saincte Malo als, And other parties of the litle Brytaine, Which to obey, as sayd was, were not fayne. The Duke hymselfe for all did undertake: With all his herte a full peace did hee make: So that in all the life time of the king, Marchants had peace withouten werring: He made a statute for Lombards in this land, That they should in noe wise take on hande Here to inhabite, here to chardge and dischardge But fortie dayes, no more time had they large. This good king by witte of such appreiffe Kept his Marchants and the sea from mischiefe.', 'A storie of Edward the third his ordinance for Britayne. HERE bring I in a storie to mee lent, That a good Squire in time of Parliament Tooke unto mee well written in a scrowe: That I have commond both with high and lowe, Of which all men accorden into one, That it was done not many yeeres agone. But when noble King Edward the thrid Reigned in grace, right thus it betyd. For hee had a maner gelosie To his Marchants and loved them hartily. He feld the weyes to rule well the see, Whereby Marchants might have prosperitee. That for Harflew Houndflew did he maken; And great werre that time were undertaken, betwixt the King and the Duke of Britayne: At last to fall to peace both were they fayne: Upon the wich made with convencion Our Marchants made hem readie bowne Toward Britayne to loade their Marchandie, Wening hem friends they went foorth boldly: But soone anon our Marchants were ytake, And wee spedde never the better for truce sake. They lost her good, her navy and spending: But their complaint came unto the king. Then wext he wroth, and to the Duke he sent, And complained that such harme was hent; By convention and peace made so refused: Wich Duke sent againe, and him excused, Rehearsing that the mount of Saincte Michael, And Sainct Malo would never a dell Be subject unto his governance, Nor be under his obeysance: And so they did withouten him that deede. But when the king anon had taken heede: Hee in his herte set a judgement, Without calling of any Parliament, Or greate tarry to take long advise To fortifie anon he did devise Of English Townes three, that is to say, Dertmouth, Plymouth, the third it is Fowey: And gave hem helpe and notable puisance With insistence set them in governance Upon pety Bretayne for to werre. Those good sea men would no more differre, But bete hem home and made they might not rowte, Tooke prisoners, and made them for to lowte. And efte the Duke, an ensample wise, Wrote to the king as he first did devise, Him excusing: But our men wood With great power passed over the floode And werred foorth into the Dukes londe, And had ny destroyed free and bond. But than the Duke knewe that the townes three Should have lost all his native Countrie, He undertooke by suretie true not false, For mount Michael and Saincte Malo als, And other parties of the litle Brytaine, Which to obey, as sayd was, were not fayne. The Duke hymselfe for all did undertake: With all his herte a full peace did hee make: So that in all the life time of the king, Marchants had peace withouten werring: He made a statute for Lombards in this land, That they should in noe wise take on hande Here to inhabite, here to chardge and dischardge But fortie dayes, no more time had they large. This good king by witte of such appreiffe Kept his Marchants and the sea from mischiefe.', 'Of the commodities of Scotland and draping of helwolles in Flanders. The fourth Chapiter. MOREOVER of Scotland the commodities Are Felles, Hides, and of Wooll the Fleese. And all these must passe by us away Into Flanders by England, sooth to say. And all her woolle was draped for to sell In the Townes of Poperinge and of Bell; Which my Lord of Glocester with ire For her falshed set upon a fire. And yet they of Bell and Poperinge Could never drape her wooll for any thing, But if they had English woll withall. Our goodly wooll which is so generall Needefull to them in Spaine and Scotland als, And other costes, this sentence is not false: Yee worthy Marchants I doe it upon you, I have this learned ye wot well where and howe: Ye wotte the Staple of that Marchandie, Of this Scotland is Flaunders sekerly. And the Scots bene charged knowen at the eye, Out of Flanders with little Mercerie, And great plentie of Haberdashers Ware, And halfe her shippes with cart wheeles bare, And with Barrowes are laden as in substance: Thus most rude ware are in her chevesance. So they may not forbeare this Flemish land. Therefore if wee would manly take in hand, To keepe this Sea from Flanders and from Spaine, And from Scotland, like as from pety Britaine, Wee should right soone have peace for all her bosts, For they must needes passe by our English costs.', 'Of the commodities of Pruce, and High Dutch men,and Easterlings. The fifth Chapitle. NOWE goe foorth to the commodities, That commeth from Pruce in two maner degrees. For two maner people have such use, That is to say, High Duch men of Pruse, And Easterlings, which might not be forborne, Out of Flanders, but it were verely lorne. For they bring in the substance of the Beere, That they drinken feele too good chepe, not dere.Yee have heard that two Flemings togiderWill undertake or they goe any whither,Or they rise once to drinke a Ferkin full,Of good Beerekin: so sore they hall and pull.Under the board they pissen as they sit:This commeth of covenant of a worthie wit.Without Caleis in their Butter they cakkedWhen they fled home, and when they leysure lackedTo holde their siege, they went like as a Doe:Well was that Fleming that might trusse, and goe.For feare they turned backe and hyed fast,My Lord of Glocester made hem so agastWith his comming, and sought hem in her land,And brent and slowe as he had take on hand:So that our enemies durst not bide, nor stere,They fled to mewe, they durst no more appeare,Rebuked sore for ever so shamefully,Unto her utter everlasting villanie. Nowe Beere and Bakon bene fro Pruse ybroughtInto Flanders, as loved and farre ysought;Osmond, Copper, Bow-staves, Steele, and Wexe,Peltreware and grey Pitch, Terre, Board, and flexe:And Colleyne threed, Fustian and Canvas,Card, Bukeram: of olde time thus it was.But the Flemings among these things dere,In common loven best Bakon and Beere.Also Pruse men maken her adventureOf Plate of silver of wedges good and sureIn great plentie which they bring and bye,Out of the lands of Beame and Hungarie:Which is increase full great unto their land,And they bene laden, I understand,With wollen cloth all maner of coloursBy dyers crafted full divers, that ben ours.And they adventure full greatly unto the Bay,for salt that is needefull withouten nay.Thus if they would not our friends bee,We might lightly stoppe hem in the see:They should not passe our streemes withouten leve,It would not be, but if we should hem greve.', 'Of the commodities of the Genuoys and her great Caracks. Chap. 6. THE Genuois comen in sundry wises Into this land with divers marchandises In great Caracks, arrayed withouten lacke With cloth of gold, silke, and pepper blacke They bring with them, and of crood great plentee, Woll Oyle, Woad ashen, by vessel in the see, Cotton, Rochalum, and good gold of Genne. And then be charged with wolle againe I wenne, And wollen cloth of ours of colours all. And they adventure, as ofte it doth befall, Into Flanders with such things as they bye, That is their chefe staple sekerly: And if they would be our full enemies, They should not passe our stremes with marchandise.', 'The commodities and nicetees of the Venetians and Florentines, with their Gallees. Chap. 7.THE great Galees of Venice and Florence Be well laden with things of complacence, All spicery and of grossers ware: With sweete wines all maner of chaffare, Apes, and Japes, and marmusets tayled, Nifles and trifles that little have avayled: And things with which they fetely blere our eye: With things not induring that we bye. For much of this chaffare that is wastable Might be forborne for dere and deceivable. And that I wene as for infirmities In our England are such commodities Withouten helpe of any other lond Which by witte and practise both yfound: That all humors might be voyded sure, Which that we gleder with our English cure: That we should have no neede of Scamonie, Turbit, enforbe, correct Diagredie, Rubarbe, Sene, and yet they ben to needefull, But I know things al so speedefull, That growen here, as those things sayd. Let of this matter no man be dismayde; But that a man may voyde infirmitie Without degrees fet fro beyond the sea.And yef they should except be any thingIt were but sugre, trust to my saying:He that trusteth not to my saying and sentence,Let him better search experience.In this matter I will not ferther prease,Who so not beleeveth, let him leave and cease.Thus these galeys for this licking ware,And eating ware, bare hence our best chaffare:Cloth, woll, and tinne, which as I sayd before,Out of this lond worst might be forbore,For ech other land of necessitieHave great neede to buy some of them three:And we receive of hem into this costeWare and chaffare that lightly wilbe loste.And would Jesus, that our Lordis woldConsider this well both yong and old:Namely old that have experience,That might the yonge exhort to prudence;What harme, what hurt, and what hinderanceIs done to us, unto our great grievance,Of such lands, and of such nations:As experte men know by probations,By writings as discovered our counsailes,And false colour alwaies the countertailesOf our enimies; that doth us hinderingUnto our goods, our Relme, and to the king:As wise men have shewed well at eye;And all this is couloured by marchandye.  An example of deceite.ALSO they bere the gold out of this land,And sucke the thrift away out of our hand:As the Waspe souketh honie fro the bee,So minisheth our commoditee.Now wol ye here how they in CotteswoldWere wont to borrow or they shold be soldHer woll good as for yere and yere.Of cloth and tinne they did in like manere:And in her galies ship this marchandie:Then soone at Venice of them men woll it bye.Then utterne there the chaffare by the peise,And lightly als there they make her reise.And when the goods beene at Venice sold,Then to carie her change they this money have,They will it profer, their subtiltie to save,To English marchants to yeve it out by eschangeTo be payed againe they make not strange,At the receiving and sight of a letter,Here in England, seeming for the better,by foure pence lesse in the noble round:That is twelve pence in the golden pound.And if wee wol have of paymentA full moneth, than must him needes assentTo eight pence losse, that is shillings twaineIn the English pound; as eft soone againe,For two moneths twelve pence must he pay.In the English pound what is that to say,But shillings three? So that in pound fellFor hurt and harme hard is with hem to dwell.And when English marchants have contentThis eschange in England of assent,That these sayd Venecians have in wooneAnd Florentines to bere her gold sooneOver the see into Flanders againe:And thus they live in Flanders, sooth to saine,And in London with such chevisance,That men call usury, to our losse and hinderance. Another example of deceite. Now lesten well how they made us a valeys When they borrowed at the town of Caleis As they were wont, their woll that was hem lent, For yere and yere they should make payment. And sometime als two yere and two yeare. This was fayre love: but yet will ye heare, How they to Bruges would her woll carie, And for hem take payment withouten tarie, And sell it fast for ready money in hand. For fifty pounds of money of losse they wold not wond In a thousand pound, and live thereby Till the day of payment easily, Come againe in exchange: making Full like usury, as men make undertaking.Than whan this payment of a thousand poundWas well content, they should have chaffare soundIf they wold fro the Staple full,Receive againe three thousand pound in woll. In Cotteswold also they ride about, And all England, and buy withouten doubte What them list with freedome and franchise, More then we English may gitten many wise. But would God that without lenger delayes These galees were unfraught in fortie dayes, And in fortie dayes charged againe, And that they might be put to certaine To goe to oste, as we there with hem doe. It were expedient that they did right soe, As we doe there. If the king would it: Ah what worship wold fall to English wit? What profite also to our marchandie Which wold of nede be cherished hertilie? For I would witte, why now our navie fayleth, When manie a foe us at our doore assayleth. Now in these dayes, that if there come a nede, What navie should we have it is to drede. In Denmarke were full noble conquerours In time past, full worthy warriours: Which when they had their marchants destroyed, To poverty they fell, thus were they noyed: And so they stand at mischiefe at this day. This learned I late well writon, this no nay. Therefore beware, I can no better will, If grace it woll, of other mennis perill. For if marchants were cherished to her speede, We were not likely to fayle in any neede. If they be rich, then in prosperitee Shalbe our londe, lords, and commontee, And in worship. Now thinke I on the sonne Of marchandy Richard of Whitingdon; That load sterre, and chiefe chosen floure: What hath by him our England of honour, And what profite hath bin of his riches, And yet lasteth dayly in worthines? That pen and paper may not me suffice Him to describe: so high he was of price Above marchants, that set him one of the best: I can no more, but God have him in rest.  Now the principal matter. WHAT reason is it that we should goe to oste In their countries, & in this English costeThey should not so? but have more libertyThen we our selves now also motte I thee.I would to gifts men should take no heedeThat letteth our thing publicke for to speede.For this we see well every day at eye,Gifts and fests stopen our policie.Now see that fooles ben either they or wee:But ever we have the worse in this countree.Therefore let hem unto oste go here,Or be we free with hem in like manereIn their countrees: and if it will not bee,Compell them unto oste, and yee shall seeMoch avantage, and moch profite arise,Moch more then I can write in any wise.  Of our charge and discharge at her marts.CONCEIVE wel here, that Englishmen at martesBe discharged, for all her craftes and artes,In Brabant of her marchandyIn fourteene dayes, and ageine hastilyIn the same dayes fourteene acharged eft.And if they bide lenger all is bereft,Anon they should forfeit her goods all,Or marchandy: it should no better fall.And we to martis in Brabant charged beeneWith English cloth full good and fayre to seene:We ben againe charged with mercerie,Haburdasher ware, and with grosserie:To which marts, that English men call fayres,Ech nation oft maketh her repayres:English, and French, Lombards, Jennoyes,Catalones, thedre they take her wayes:Scots, Spaniards, Irishmen there abides,With great plenty bringing of sale hides.And I here say that we in Brabant bye,Flanders and Zeland more of marchandyIn common use then done all other nations:This have I heard of marchants relations:And if the English ben not in the martsThey ben feeble, and as nought bene her parts.For they byemore, and fro purse put outMore marchandie then all the other rowte.Kept then the see, shippes should not bring ne fetch,And then the carreys wold not thidre stretch: And so those marts wold full evill thee, If we manly kept about the see.', 'An example of deceite.ALSO they bere the gold out of this land,And sucke the thrift away out of our hand:As the Waspe souketh honie fro the bee,So minisheth our commoditee.Now wol ye here how they in CotteswoldWere wont to borrow or they shold be soldHer woll good as for yere and yere.Of cloth and tinne they did in like manere:And in her galies ship this marchandie:Then soone at Venice of them men woll it bye.Then utterne there the chaffare by the peise,And lightly als there they make her reise.And when the goods beene at Venice sold,Then to carie her change they this money have,They will it profer, their subtiltie to save,To English marchants to yeve it out by eschangeTo be payed againe they make not strange,At the receiving and sight of a letter,Here in England, seeming for the better,by foure pence lesse in the noble round:That is twelve pence in the golden pound.And if wee wol have of paymentA full moneth, than must him needes assentTo eight pence losse, that is shillings twaineIn the English pound; as eft soone againe,For two moneths twelve pence must he pay.In the English pound what is that to say,But shillings three? So that in pound fellFor hurt and harme hard is with hem to dwell.And when English marchants have contentThis eschange in England of assent,That these sayd Venecians have in wooneAnd Florentines to bere her gold sooneOver the see into Flanders againe:And thus they live in Flanders, sooth to saine,And in London with such chevisance,That men call usury, to our losse and hinderance.', 'Another example of deceite. Now lesten well how they made us a valeys When they borrowed at the town of Caleis As they were wont, their woll that was hem lent, For yere and yere they should make payment. And sometime als two yere and two yeare. This was fayre love: but yet will ye heare, How they to Bruges would her woll carie, And for hem take payment withouten tarie, And sell it fast for ready money in hand. For fifty pounds of money of losse they wold not wond In a thousand pound, and live thereby Till the day of payment easily, Come againe in exchange: making Full like usury, as men make undertaking.Than whan this payment of a thousand poundWas well content, they should have chaffare soundIf they wold fro the Staple full,Receive againe three thousand pound in woll. In Cotteswold also they ride about, And all England, and buy withouten doubte What them list with freedome and franchise, More then we English may gitten many wise. But would God that without lenger delayes These galees were unfraught in fortie dayes, And in fortie dayes charged againe, And that they might be put to certaine To goe to oste, as we there with hem doe. It were expedient that they did right soe, As we doe there. If the king would it: Ah what worship wold fall to English wit? What profite also to our marchandie Which wold of nede be cherished hertilie? For I would witte, why now our navie fayleth, When manie a foe us at our doore assayleth. Now in these dayes, that if there come a nede, What navie should we have it is to drede. In Denmarke were full noble conquerours In time past, full worthy warriours: Which when they had their marchants destroyed, To poverty they fell, thus were they noyed: And so they stand at mischiefe at this day. This learned I late well writon, this no nay. Therefore beware, I can no better will, If grace it woll, of other mennis perill. For if marchants were cherished to her speede, We were not likely to fayle in any neede. If they be rich, then in prosperitee Shalbe our londe, lords, and commontee, And in worship. Now thinke I on the sonne Of marchandy Richard of Whitingdon; That load sterre, and chiefe chosen floure: What hath by him our England of honour, And what profite hath bin of his riches, And yet lasteth dayly in worthines? That pen and paper may not me suffice Him to describe: so high he was of price Above marchants, that set him one of the best: I can no more, but God have him in rest.', 'Now the principal matter. WHAT reason is it that we should goe to oste In their countries, & in this English costeThey should not so? but have more libertyThen we our selves now also motte I thee.I would to gifts men should take no heedeThat letteth our thing publicke for to speede.For this we see well every day at eye,Gifts and fests stopen our policie.Now see that fooles ben either they or wee:But ever we have the worse in this countree.Therefore let hem unto oste go here,Or be we free with hem in like manereIn their countrees: and if it will not bee,Compell them unto oste, and yee shall seeMoch avantage, and moch profite arise,Moch more then I can write in any wise.', 'Of our charge and discharge at her marts.CONCEIVE wel here, that Englishmen at martesBe discharged, for all her craftes and artes,In Brabant of her marchandyIn fourteene dayes, and ageine hastilyIn the same dayes fourteene acharged eft.And if they bide lenger all is bereft,Anon they should forfeit her goods all,Or marchandy: it should no better fall.And we to martis in Brabant charged beeneWith English cloth full good and fayre to seene:We ben againe charged with mercerie,Haburdasher ware, and with grosserie:To which marts, that English men call fayres,Ech nation oft maketh her repayres:English, and French, Lombards, Jennoyes,Catalones, thedre they take her wayes:Scots, Spaniards, Irishmen there abides,With great plenty bringing of sale hides.And I here say that we in Brabant bye,Flanders and Zeland more of marchandyIn common use then done all other nations:This have I heard of marchants relations:And if the English ben not in the martsThey ben feeble, and as nought bene her parts.For they byemore, and fro purse put outMore marchandie then all the other rowte.Kept then the see, shippes should not bring ne fetch,And then the carreys wold not thidre stretch: And so those marts wold full evill thee, If we manly kept about the see.', 'Of the commodities of Brabant and Zeland and Henauld and marchandy carried by land to the martes. Cap. 8. YET marchandy of Brabant and Zeland The Madre and Woad, that dyers take on hand To dyen with, Garlike and Onions, And saltfishe als for husband and commons. But they of Holland at Caleis byen our felles, And wolles our, that Englishmen hem selles. And the chaffare that Englishmen doe byen In the marts, that noe man may denien, Is not made in Brabant that cuntree: It commeth from out of Henauld, not by see, But al by land, by carts, and from France, Bourgoyne, Colein, Cameret in substance, Therefore at marts if there be a restraint, Men seyne plainely that list no fables paynt, If Englishmen be withdrawen away, Is great rebuke and losse to her affray: As though we sent into the land of France Ten thousand people, men of good puissance, To werre unto her hindring multifarie, So ben our English marchants necessarie. If it be thus assay, and we shall witten Of men experte, by whom I have this written. For sayd is that this carted marchandy Draweth in value as much verily, As all the goods that come in shippes thider, Which Englishmen bye most and bring it hither. For her marts ben febel, shame to say, But Englishmen thider dresse her way. A conclusion of this depending of keeping of the sea.THAN I conclude, if never so much by landWere by carres brought unto their hand,If well the sea were kept in governanceThey should by sea have no deliverance.Wee should hem stop, and we should hem destroy,As prisoners we should hem bring to annoy.And so we should of our cruell enimiesMake our friends for feare of marchandies,If they were not suffered for to passeInto Flanders. But we be frayle as glasseAnd also brittle, not thought never abiding;But when grace shineth soone are we sliding;We will it not receive in any wise:That maken lust, envie, and covetise:Expone me this; and yee shall sooth it find,Bere it away, and keepe it in your mind.Then shuld worship unto our Noble beeIn feate and forme to lord and Majestie:Liche as the seale the greatest of this landOn the one side hath, as I understand,A prince riding with his swerd ydraw,In the other side sitting, soth it is in saw,Betokening good rule and punishingIn very deede of England by the king.And it is so, God blessed mought he bee.So in likewise I would were on the seeBy the Noble, that swerde should have power,And the ships on the sea about us here.What needeth a garland which is made of IvieShewe a taverne winelesse, also thrive I?If men were wise, the Frenchmen and FlemingShuld bere no state in sea by werring.Then Hankin lyons shuld not be so boldTo stoppe wine, and shippes for to holdUnto our shame. He had be beten thence.Alas, alas, why did we this offence,Fully to shend the old English fames;And the profits of England, and their names:Why is this power called of covetise;With false colours cast beforn our eyes?That if good men called werrioursWould take in hand for the commons succours,To purge the sea unto our great avayle,And winne hem goods, and have up the sayle,And on our enimies their lives to impart,So that they might their prises well departe,As reson wold, justice and equitie;To make this land have lordship of the sea.Then shall Lombards and other fained friendsMake their chalenges by colour false offends,And say their chaffare in the shippes is,And chalenge al. Looke if this be amisse.For thus may al that men have bought to sore,Ben soone excused, and saved by false colour.Beware ye men that bere the great in handThat they destroy the policie of this land,By gifte and good, and the fine golden clothis,And silke, and other: say yee not this soth is?But if we had very experienceThat they take meede with privie violence,Carpets, and things of price and pleasance,Whereby stopped should be good governance:And if it were as yee say to mee,Than wold I say, alas cupiditie,That they that have her lives put in drede,Shalbe soone out of winning, all for meed,And lose her costes, and brought to poverty,That they shall never have lust to goe to sea.An exhortation to make an ordinance against colour ofmaintainers and excusers of folkes goods. FOR this colour that must be sayd alofte And be declared of the great full ofte, That our seamen wol by many wise Spoile our friends in steede of our enimies: For which colour and Lombards maintenance, The king it needes to make an ordinance With his Counsayle that may not fayle, I trowe, That friends should from enimies be knowe, Our enimies taken and our friends spared: The remedy of hem must be declared. Thus may the sea be kept in no sell, For if ought be spoken, wot yee well, We have the strokes, and enemies have the winning: But mayntainers are parteners of the finning. We live in lust and bide in covetise: This is our rule to maintaine marchandise, And policie that wee have on the sea. And, but God helpe, it will no other bee.', 'A conclusion of this depending of keeping of the sea.THAN I conclude, if never so much by landWere by carres brought unto their hand,If well the sea were kept in governanceThey should by sea have no deliverance.Wee should hem stop, and we should hem destroy,As prisoners we should hem bring to annoy.And so we should of our cruell enimiesMake our friends for feare of marchandies,If they were not suffered for to passeInto Flanders. But we be frayle as glasseAnd also brittle, not thought never abiding;But when grace shineth soone are we sliding;We will it not receive in any wise:That maken lust, envie, and covetise:Expone me this; and yee shall sooth it find,Bere it away, and keepe it in your mind.Then shuld worship unto our Noble beeIn feate and forme to lord and Majestie:Liche as the seale the greatest of this landOn the one side hath, as I understand,A prince riding with his swerd ydraw,In the other side sitting, soth it is in saw,Betokening good rule and punishingIn very deede of England by the king.And it is so, God blessed mought he bee.So in likewise I would were on the seeBy the Noble, that swerde should have power,And the ships on the sea about us here.What needeth a garland which is made of IvieShewe a taverne winelesse, also thrive I?If men were wise, the Frenchmen and FlemingShuld bere no state in sea by werring.Then Hankin lyons shuld not be so boldTo stoppe wine, and shippes for to holdUnto our shame. He had be beten thence.Alas, alas, why did we this offence,Fully to shend the old English fames;And the profits of England, and their names:Why is this power called of covetise;With false colours cast beforn our eyes?That if good men called werrioursWould take in hand for the commons succours,To purge the sea unto our great avayle,And winne hem goods, and have up the sayle,And on our enimies their lives to impart,So that they might their prises well departe,As reson wold, justice and equitie;To make this land have lordship of the sea.Then shall Lombards and other fained friendsMake their chalenges by colour false offends,And say their chaffare in the shippes is,And chalenge al. Looke if this be amisse.For thus may al that men have bought to sore,Ben soone excused, and saved by false colour.Beware ye men that bere the great in handThat they destroy the policie of this land,By gifte and good, and the fine golden clothis,And silke, and other: say yee not this soth is?But if we had very experienceThat they take meede with privie violence,Carpets, and things of price and pleasance,Whereby stopped should be good governance:And if it were as yee say to mee,Than wold I say, alas cupiditie,That they that have her lives put in drede,Shalbe soone out of winning, all for meed,And lose her costes, and brought to poverty,That they shall never have lust to goe to sea.', 'An exhortation to make an ordinance against colour ofmaintainers and excusers of folkes goods. FOR this colour that must be sayd alofte And be declared of the great full ofte, That our seamen wol by many wise Spoile our friends in steede of our enimies: For which colour and Lombards maintenance, The king it needes to make an ordinance With his Counsayle that may not fayle, I trowe, That friends should from enimies be knowe, Our enimies taken and our friends spared: The remedy of hem must be declared. Thus may the sea be kept in no sell, For if ought be spoken, wot yee well, We have the strokes, and enemies have the winning: But mayntainers are parteners of the finning. We live in lust and bide in covetise: This is our rule to maintaine marchandise, And policie that wee have on the sea. And, but God helpe, it will no other bee.', "Of the commodities of Ireland, and policie and keeping thereof, and conquering of wild Irish: with an incident of Wales. Chap. 9.  I CAST to speake of Ireland but a litle: Commodities of it I will entitle,Hides, and fish, Salmon, Hake, Herringe,Irish wooll, and linen cloth, faldinge,And marterns goode ben her marchandie,Hertes Hides, and other of Venerie.Skinnes of Otter, Squirell and Irish hare,Of sheepe, lambe, and Foxe, is her chaffare,Felles of Kiddes, and Conies great plentie.So that if Ireland helpe us to keepe the sea,Because the King cleped is Rex Angliae,And is Dominus also Hyberniae,Old possessed by Progenitours:The Irish men have cause like to oursOur land and hers together to defend,That no enemie should hurt ne offend,Ireland ne us: but as one commontieShould helpe well to keepe about the sea:For they have havens great, and goodly bayes,Sure, wyde and deepe, of good assayes,At Waterford, and costes many one.And as men sayne in England be there noneBetter havens, ships in to ride,No more sure for enemies to abide.Why speake I thus so much of Ireland?For all so much as I can understand,It is fertile for things that there doe groweAnd multiplien, loke who lust to knowe,So large, so good, and so commodious,That to declare is strange and marvailous.For of silver and golde there is the oore,Among the wilde Irish though they be poore.For they are rude and can thereon no skill:So that if we had their peace and good willTo myne and fine, and metal for to pure,In wilde Irish might we finde the cure,As in London saith a Juellere,Which brought from thence golde oore to us here,Whereof was fyned mettal goode and clene,As they touch, no better could be seene.Nowe here beware and heartily take intent,As yee will answere at last judgement,That for slought and for racheshedeYee remember with all your might to hedeTo keepe Ireland that it be not lost.For it is a boterasse and a post, Under England, and Wales another: God forbid, but ech were others brothers Of one ligeance due unto the king. But I have pittie in good faith of this thing That I shall say with avisement: I am aferde that Ireland will be shent: It must awey, it wol bee lost from us, But if thou helpe, thou Jesu gracious, And give us grace al slought to leve beside. For much thing in my herte is hide, Which in another treatise I caste to write Made al onely for that soile and site, Of fertile Ireland, wich might not be forborne, But if England were nigh as goode as gone. God forbid that a wild Irish wirlinge Should be chosen for to bee their kinge, After her conqueste for our last puissance, And hinder us by other lands alliance. Wise men seyn, wich felin not, ne douten, That wild Irish so much of ground have gotten There upon us, as likenesse may be Like as England to sheeris two or three Of this our land is made comparable: So wild Irish have wonne on us unable Yet to defend, and of none power, That our ground is there a litle corner, To all Ireland in true comparison. It needeth no more this matter to expon. Which if it bee lost, as Christ Jesu forbed, Farewel Wales, then England commeth to dred, For aliance of Scotland and of Spaine, And other moe, as the pety Bretaine, And so have enemies environ round about. I beseech God, that some prayers devout Mutt let the said apparance probable Thus disposed without feyned fable. But all onely for perill that I see Thus imminent, it's likely for to bee. And well I wotte, that from hence to Rome, And, as men say, in all Christendome, Is no ground ne land to Ireland liche, So large, so good, so plenteous, so riche, That to this worde Dominus doe long. Then mee semeth that right were and no wrong, To get the lande: and it were piteous To us to lese this high name Dominus. And all this word Dominus of name Shuld have the ground obeysant wilde and tame. That name and people togidre might accord Al the ground subject to the Lord. And that it is possible to bee subject, Unto the king wel shal it bee detect, In the litle booke that I of spake. I trowe reson al this wol undertake. And I knowe wel howe it stante, Alas fortune beginneth so to scant, Or ellis grace, that deade is governance. For so minisheth parties of our puissance, In that land that wee lese every yere, More ground and more, as well as yee may here. I herd a man speake to mee full late. Which was a lord of full great estate; Than expense of one yere done in France Werred on men well willed of puissance This said ground of Ireland to conquere. And yet because England might not forbere These said expenses gadred in one yeere, But in three yeeres or foure gadred up here, Might winne Ireland to a finall conqueste, In one sole yeere to set us all at reste. And how soone wolde this be paied ageyne: Which were it worth yerely, if wee not feyne: I wol declare, who so luste to looke, I trowe full plainely in my litle booke. But covetise, and singularitie Of owne profite, envie, crueltie, Hath doon us harme, and doe us every day, And musters made that shame is to say: Our money spent al to litle availe, And our enimies so greatly doone prevaile, That what harme may fall and overthwerte I may unneth write more for sore of herte. An exhortation to the keeping of Wales.BEWARE of Wales, Christ Jesu mutt us keepe,That it make not our childers childe to weepe,Ne us also, so if it goe his way,By unwarenes: seth that many a day Men have bee ferde of her rebellion, By great tokens and ostentation: Seche the meanes with a discrete avise, And helpe that they rudely not arise For to rebell, that Christ it forbede. Looke wel aboute, for God wote yee have neede, Unfainingly, unfeyning and unfeynt, That conscience for slought you not atteynt: Kepe well that grounde, for harme that may ben used, Or afore God mutte yee ben accused.", 'An exhortation to the keeping of Wales.BEWARE of Wales, Christ Jesu mutt us keepe,That it make not our childers childe to weepe,Ne us also, so if it goe his way,By unwarenes: seth that many a day Men have bee ferde of her rebellion, By great tokens and ostentation: Seche the meanes with a discrete avise, And helpe that they rudely not arise For to rebell, that Christ it forbede. Looke wel aboute, for God wote yee have neede, Unfainingly, unfeyning and unfeynt, That conscience for slought you not atteynt: Kepe well that grounde, for harme that may ben used, Or afore God mutte yee ben accused.', 'Of the commodious Stockfish of Island, and keeping of the Sea, namely the Narrow sea, with an incident of the keeping of Caleis. Chap. 10. OF Island to write is litle nede, Save of Stock-fish: Yet forsooth in deed Out of Bristowe, and costes many one, Men have practised by nedle and by stone Thider wardes within a litle while, Within twelve yere, and without perill Gon and come, as men were wont of old Of Scarborough unto the costes cold. And nowe so fele shippes this yeere there ware, That moch losse for unfreyght they bare: Island might not make hem to bee fraught Unto the Hawys: thus much harme they caught. Then here I ende of the commoditees For which neede is well to kepe the seas: Este and Weste, South and North they bee. And chiefly kepe the sharpe narrow see, Betweene Dover and Caleis: and as thus that foes passe none without good will of us: And they abide our danger in the length, What for our costis and Caleis in our strength. An exhortation for the sure keeping of Caleis. AND for the love of God, and of his blisse Cherish yee Caleis better then it is. See well thereto, and heare the grete complaint That true men tellen, that woll no lies paint, And as yee know that writing commeth from thence: Doe not to England for slought so great offence, But that redressed it bee for any thing: Leste a song of sorrow that wee sing. For litle wenith the foole who so might chese What harme it were good Caleis for to lese: What wo it were for all this English ground. Which wel conceived the Emperour Sigismound, That of all joyes made it one of the moste, That Caleis was subject unto English coste. Him thought it was a jewel most of all, And so the same in Latine did it call. And if yee wol more of Caleis heare and knowe, I cast to write within a litle scrowe, Like as I have done before by and by In other parteis of our policie. Loke how hard it was at the first to get; And by my counsell lightly doe not it let. For if wee lese it with shame of face Wilfully, it is for lacke of grace. Howe was Harflew cried upon, and Rone, That they were likely for shought to be gone; Howe was it warned and cried on in England, I make record with this pen in my hand. It was warened plainely in Normandie, And in England, and I thereon did crie. The world was defrauded, it betyde right so. Farewell Harflew: lewdly it was a go. Nowe ware Caleis, I can say no better: My soule discharge I by this present letter.', 'An exhortation for the sure keeping of Caleis. AND for the love of God, and of his blisse Cherish yee Caleis better then it is. See well thereto, and heare the grete complaint That true men tellen, that woll no lies paint, And as yee know that writing commeth from thence: Doe not to England for slought so great offence, But that redressed it bee for any thing: Leste a song of sorrow that wee sing. For litle wenith the foole who so might chese What harme it were good Caleis for to lese: What wo it were for all this English ground. Which wel conceived the Emperour Sigismound, That of all joyes made it one of the moste, That Caleis was subject unto English coste. Him thought it was a jewel most of all, And so the same in Latine did it call. And if yee wol more of Caleis heare and knowe, I cast to write within a litle scrowe, Like as I have done before by and by In other parteis of our policie. Loke how hard it was at the first to get; And by my counsell lightly doe not it let. For if wee lese it with shame of face Wilfully, it is for lacke of grace. Howe was Harflew cried upon, and Rone, That they were likely for shought to be gone; Howe was it warned and cried on in England, I make record with this pen in my hand. It was warened plainely in Normandie, And in England, and I thereon did crie. The world was defrauded, it betyde right so. Farewell Harflew: lewdly it was a go. Nowe ware Caleis, I can say no better: My soule discharge I by this present letter.', 'After the Chapitles of commodities of divers lands, sheweth the conclusion of keeping of the sea environ, by a storie of King Edgar and two incidents of King Edward the third, and King Henrie the fifth. Chap. 11. NOWE see we well then that this round see To our Noble by pariformitee Under the ship shewed there the sayle, And our king with royal apparayle, With swerd drawen bright and extent For to chastise enimies violent; Should be lord of the sea about, To keepe enimies from within and without; To behold through Christianitee Master and lord environ of the see: All living men such a prince to dreed, Of such a regne to bee aferd indeed. Thus prove I well that it was thus of old; Which by a Chronicle anon shalbe told, Right curious: but I will interprete It into English, as I did it gete: Of king Edgar: O most marvellous Prince living, wittie, and chevalerous: So good that none of his predecessours Was to him liche in prudence and honours. Hee was fortunate and more gracious Then other before, and more glorious: He was beneth no man in holines: Hee passed all in vertuous sweetnes. Of English kings was none so commendable: To English men no lesse memorable, Then Cyrus was to Perse by puissance, And as great Charles was to them of France, And as to the Romanes was great Romulus, So was to England this worthy Edgarus. I may not write more of his worthines For lacke of time, ne of his holines: But to my matter I him exemplifie, Of conditions tweyne and of his policie: Within his land was one, this is no doubt, And another in the see without; That in time of Winter and of werre, When boystrous windes put see men into fere; Within his land about by all provinces Hee passed through, perceiving his princes, Lords, and others of the commontee, Who was oppressour, and who to povertee Was drawen and brought, and who was clene in life, And was by mischiefe and by strife With over leding and extortion: And good and badde of eche condition Hee aspied: and his ministers als, Who did trought, and which of hem was fals: Howe the right and lawes of the land Were execute, and who durst take in hand To disobey his statutes and decrees, If they were well kept in all countrees: Of these he made subtile investigation Of his owne espie, and other mens relation. Among other was his great busines, Well to ben ware, that great men of riches, And men of might in citie nor in towne Should to the poore doe non oppression. Thus was hee wont in this Winter tide On such enforchise busily to abide. This was his labour for the publike thing, Thus was hee occupied: a passing holy King. Nowe to purpose, in the Sommer faire Of lusty season, whan clered was the aire, He had redie shippes made before Great and huge, not fewe but many a store: Full three thousand and sixe hundred also Stately inough on our sea to goe. The Chronicles say, these shippes were full boysteous: Such things long to kings victorious. In Sommer tide would hee have in wonne And in custome to be ful redie soone, With multitude of men of good array And instruments of werre of best assay. Who could hem well in any wise descrive? It were not light for eny man alive. Thus he and his would enter shippes great Habiliments having and the fleete Of See werres, that joyfull was to see Such a navie and Lord of Majestee, There present in person hem among To saile and rowe environ all along, So regal liche about the English isle; To all strangers terrours and perile. Whose fame went about in all the world stout, Unto great fere of all that be without, And exercise to Knights and his meynee To him longing of his natall cuntree. For courage of nede must have exercise, Thus occupied for esshewin of vice. This knew the king that policie espied; Winter and Somer he was thus occupied. Thus conclude I by authoritee Of Chronike, that environ the see Should bene our subjects unto the King, And hee bee Lord thereof for eny thing: For great worship and for profite alsoTo defend his land fro every foo.That worthy king I leve, Edgar by name,And all the Chronike of his worthy fame: Saffe onely this I may not passe away, A worde of mighty strength till that I say, That graunted him God such worship here, For his merites, hee was without pere, That sometime at his great festivitee Kings, and Erles of many a countree, And princes fele were there present, And many Lords came thider by assent, To his worship: but in a certaine day Hee bad shippes to bee redie of aray: For to visit Saint Johns Church hee list Rowing unto the good holie Baptist, Hee assigned to Erles, Lords, and knights Many ships right godly to sights: And for himselfe and eight kings moo Subject to him hee made kepe one of thoo, A good shippe, and entrede into it With eight kings, and downe did they sit; And eche of them an ore tooke in hand, At ore hales, as I understand, And he himselfe at the shippe behinde As steris man it became of kinde. Such another rowing I dare well say, Was not seene of Princes many a day. Lo than how hee in waters got the price, In lande, in see, that I may not suffice To tell, 0 right, 0 magnanimitee, That king Edgar had upon the see.An incident of the Lord of the sea King Edward the third. OF king Edward I passe and his prowes On lande, on sea yee knowe his worthines: The siege of Caleis, ye know well all the matter Round about by land, and by the water, Howe it lasted not yeeres many agoe, After the battell of Crecye was ydoe: Howe it was closed environ about, Olde men sawe it, which liven, this is no doubt. Old Knights say that the Duke of Burgoyn, Late rebuked for all his golden coyne; Of ship on see made no besieging there, For want of shippes that durst not come for feare. It was nothing besieged by the see: Thus call they it no siege for honestee. Gonnes assailed, but assault was there none, No siege, but fuge: well was he that might be gone: This maner carping have knights ferre in age, Expert through age of this maner language. But king Edward made a siege royall, And wanne the towne: and in especiall The sea was kept, and thereof he was Lord. Thus made he Nobles coyned of record; In whose time was no navie on the see That might withstand his majestie. Battell of Scluse yee may rede every day, Howe it was done I leve and goe my way: It was so late done that yee it knowe, In comparison within a litle throwe: For which to God give we honour and glorie; For Lord of see the king was with victorie.Another incident of keeping of the see, in the time of the marveilous werriour and victorious Prince, King Henrie the fifth, and of his great shippes. AND if I should conclude all by the King Henrie the fift, what was his purposing, Whan at Hampton he made the great dromons, Which passed other great ships of all the commons; The Trinitie, the Grace de Dieu, the holy Ghost, And other moe, which as nowe bee lost. What hope ye was the kings great intent Of thoo shippes, and what in minde hee meant? It was not ellis, but that hee cast to bee Lorde round about environ of the see. And when Harflew had her siege about, There came caracks horrible great and stoute In the narrow see willing to abide, To stoppe us there with multitude of pride. My Lord of Bedford came on and had the cure, Destroyed they were by that discomfiture. This was after the king Harflew had wonne,Whan our enemies to siege had begonne; That all was slaine or take, by true relation, To his worshippe, and of his English nation. There was present the kings chamberlaine At both battailes; which knoweth this in certaine; He can it tell otherwise then I: Aske him, and witte; I passe foorth hastily. What had this king of his magnificence, Of great courage, of wisedome, and prudence? Provision, forewitte, audacitee, Of fortitude, justice, and agilitee, Discretion, subtile avisednesse, Attemperance, Noblesse, and worthinesse: Science, prowesse, devotion, equitie, Of most estate, with his magnanimitie Liche to Edgar, and the saide Edward, As much of both liche hem as in regard. Where was on live a man more victorious, And in so short time prince so marveilous? By land and sea, so well he him acquitte, To speake of him I stony in my witte. Thus here I leave the king with his noblesse, Henry the fift, with whom all my processe Of this true booke of pure policie Of sea keeping, entending victorie I leave endly: for about in the see No Prince was of better strenuitee. And if he had to this time lived here, He had bene Prince named withouten pere: His great ships should have ben put in preefe, Unto the ende that he ment of in cheefe, For doubt it not but that he would have bee Lord and master about the round see: And kept it sure to stoppe our enemies hence, And wonne us good, and wisely brought it thence: That no passage should be without danger, And his licence on see to move and sterre.', 'An incident of the Lord of the sea King Edward the third. OF king Edward I passe and his prowes On lande, on sea yee knowe his worthines: The siege of Caleis, ye know well all the matter Round about by land, and by the water, Howe it lasted not yeeres many agoe, After the battell of Crecye was ydoe: Howe it was closed environ about, Olde men sawe it, which liven, this is no doubt. Old Knights say that the Duke of Burgoyn, Late rebuked for all his golden coyne; Of ship on see made no besieging there, For want of shippes that durst not come for feare. It was nothing besieged by the see: Thus call they it no siege for honestee. Gonnes assailed, but assault was there none, No siege, but fuge: well was he that might be gone: This maner carping have knights ferre in age, Expert through age of this maner language. But king Edward made a siege royall, And wanne the towne: and in especiall The sea was kept, and thereof he was Lord. Thus made he Nobles coyned of record; In whose time was no navie on the see That might withstand his majestie. Battell of Scluse yee may rede every day, Howe it was done I leve and goe my way: It was so late done that yee it knowe, In comparison within a litle throwe: For which to God give we honour and glorie; For Lord of see the king was with victorie.', 'Another incident of keeping of the see, in the time of the marveilous werriour and victorious Prince, King Henrie the fifth, and of his great shippes. AND if I should conclude all by the King Henrie the fift, what was his purposing, Whan at Hampton he made the great dromons, Which passed other great ships of all the commons; The Trinitie, the Grace de Dieu, the holy Ghost, And other moe, which as nowe bee lost. What hope ye was the kings great intent Of thoo shippes, and what in minde hee meant? It was not ellis, but that hee cast to bee Lorde round about environ of the see. And when Harflew had her siege about, There came caracks horrible great and stoute In the narrow see willing to abide, To stoppe us there with multitude of pride. My Lord of Bedford came on and had the cure, Destroyed they were by that discomfiture. This was after the king Harflew had wonne,Whan our enemies to siege had begonne; That all was slaine or take, by true relation, To his worshippe, and of his English nation. There was present the kings chamberlaine At both battailes; which knoweth this in certaine; He can it tell otherwise then I: Aske him, and witte; I passe foorth hastily. What had this king of his magnificence, Of great courage, of wisedome, and prudence? Provision, forewitte, audacitee, Of fortitude, justice, and agilitee, Discretion, subtile avisednesse, Attemperance, Noblesse, and worthinesse: Science, prowesse, devotion, equitie, Of most estate, with his magnanimitie Liche to Edgar, and the saide Edward, As much of both liche hem as in regard. Where was on live a man more victorious, And in so short time prince so marveilous? By land and sea, so well he him acquitte, To speake of him I stony in my witte. Thus here I leave the king with his noblesse, Henry the fift, with whom all my processe Of this true booke of pure policie Of sea keeping, entending victorie I leave endly: for about in the see No Prince was of better strenuitee. And if he had to this time lived here, He had bene Prince named withouten pere: His great ships should have ben put in preefe, Unto the ende that he ment of in cheefe, For doubt it not but that he would have bee Lord and master about the round see: And kept it sure to stoppe our enemies hence, And wonne us good, and wisely brought it thence: That no passage should be without danger, And his licence on see to move and sterre.', 'Of unitie, shewing of our keeping of the see: with an endly or finall processe of peace by authoritie. Chap. 12. Now than for love of Christ, and of his joy, Bring it England out of trouble and noy: Take heart and witte, and set a governance, Set many wits withouten variance, To one accord and unanimitee. Put to good will for to keepe the see, First for worship and profite also, And to rebuke of eche evill willed foe. Thus shall worship and riches to us long. Than to the Noble shall we doe no wrong, To beare that coyne in figure and in deede, To our courage, and to our enemies dreede:For which they must dresse hem to peace in haste,Or ellis their thrift to standen, and to waste.As this processe hath proved by and byAll by reason and expert policy;And by stories which proved well this parte:Or ellis I will my life put in jeoparte,But many londs would seche her peace for nede,The see wel kept: it must bee doo for drede.Thus must Flanders for nede have uniteeAnd peace with us: it will non other bee,Within short while: and ambassadoursWould bene here soone to treate for their succours.This unitee is to God pleasance:And peace after the werres variance.The ende of battaile is peace sikerly,And power causeth peace finally.Kept than the sea about in speciall,Which of England is the towne wall.As though England were likened to a citie,And the wall environ were the see.Kepe then the sea that is the wall of England:And than is England kept by Goddes hande;That as for any thing that is without,England were at ease withouten doubt,And thus should every lond one with anotherEntercommon, as brother with his brother,And live togither werrelesse in unitie,Without rancour in very charitie,In rest and peace, to Christes great pleasance,Without strife, debate and variance.Which peace men should enserche with businesse,And knit it saddely holding in holinesse.The Apostle seith, if ye list to see,Bee yee busie for to keepe uniteeOf the spirit in the bond of peace.Which is nedeful to all withouten lese.The Prophet biddeth us peace for to enquireTo pursue it, this is holy desire.Our Lord Jesu saith, Blessed motte they beeThat maken peace; that is tranquillitee.For peace makers, as Matthew writeth aright,Should be called the sonnes of God almight.God give us grace, the weyes for to keepe Of his precepts, and slugly not to sleepe In shame of sinne: that our verry foo Might be to us convers, and turned so. For in the Proverbs is a text to this purpose Plaine inough without any glose: When mens weyes please unto our Lord, It shall convert and bring to accord Mans enemies unto peace verray, In unitie, to live to Goddis pay, With unitie, peace, rest and charitie. Hee that was here cladde in humanitie, That came from heaven, and styed up with our nature, Or hee ascended, he yave to us cure, And left with us peace, ageyne striffe and debate, Mote give us peace, so well irradicate Here in this world: that after all this feste Wee may have peace in the land of beheste, Jerusalem, which of peace is the sight, With his brightnes of eternall light, There glorified in rest with his tuition, The Deitie to see with full fruition: Hee second person in divinenesse is, Who us assume, and bring us to the blis. Amen.', 'Here endeth the true processe of the Libel of English policie, exhorting all England to keepe the sea environ: shewing what profit and salvation, with worship commeth thereof to the reigne of England. GOE furth Libelle, and meekely shew thy face;Appearing ever with humble countenance:And pray my Lords to take in grace,In opposaile and cherishing the advance.To hardines if that not varianceThou hast fro trought by full experienceAuthors and reasons: if ought faile in substanceRemit to hem that yafe thee this science;That seth it is soth in verry fayth,That the wise Lord Baron of HungerfordHath thee overseene, and verely he saithThat thou art true, and thus hee doeth record,Next the Gospel: God wotte it was his worde,When hee thee redde all over in a night.Goe forth trew booke, and Christ defend thy right. Explicit libellus de Politia conservativa maris.', 'A large Charter granted by K. Edward the 4 in thesecond yere of his reigne, to the marchants of Englandresident especially in the Netherland, for their chusingof a master and governor among themselves, whichgovernement was first appointed unto one WilliamObray: with expresse mention, what authoritie heshould have.EDWARD by the grace of God king of France, & ofEngland, & lord of Ireland, to al those which shal seeor heare these letters, sendeth greeting, & good wil.Know ye, that whereas we have understood, as well bythe report of our loving and faithfull Counsellors, as bythe common complaint and report of all men, that manyvexations, griefs, debates, discords, annoyes, dissentions,& damages, have heretofore bene done, moved, committed, and happened, and do daily fal out and happenamong the common marchants & mariners, our subjectsof our realmes of France & England, & our lordships ofIreland and Wales, & of other our dominions, seigneuries,and territories, because that good discretion and authorityhath not bin observed among our saide subjects, whichabide, frequent, converse, remain, inhabit, & passe, aswelby sea as by land, into ye parts of Brabant, Flanders,Henault, Holland, Zeland, and divers other countreis &seigneuries belonging aswell to the high and mightyprince, our most deere and loving cousin ye Duke ofBurgoine, of Brabant, earle of Flanders, &c. as being inthe obedience & dominion of other lords, which are infriendship, alliance, & good wil with us: and that it isto be doubted that through the saide inconvenience andoccasion, many discommodities may ensue & fal out intime to come (which God forbid) unles we should provideconvenient remedie in this behalfe for our subjects aforesaid: wherefore we desiring most effectually and heartilyto avoide the mischiefe of the saide inconveniences &to provide convenient remedy for the same, to the endthat the said common marchants and mariners and othersour subjects of our said realms & dominions, which atthis present & hereafter shal haunt and frequent ye saidcountreis, may be justly & lawfully ruled, governed, andintreated by right & equity in the countreis aforesaid,and that equity, reason, & justice may be ministredunto them and every of them, according as the cases shalrequire, we being wel assured and having ful confidence,in the discretion, faithfulnes, wisdome, experience, &good diligence of our most deare & wellbeloved subjectWill. Obray our servant, & in regard of the good, faithfull, and acceptable services, which he hath done us in ourrealm & among our subjects in times past, & hopingthat he wil do also hereafter, we have made, ordained,constituted, committed, and established, and by the tenourof these presents, of our special grace, ful power, &authority royall, we ordaine, appoint, commit, and establish, (during our pleasure) to be governor, judge, wardenof justice, and the appurtenances & appendances therof,which we have or may have over our said commonsubjects the marchants travailing hereafter as wel by seaas by land, and abiding in the said countries of Brabant,Flanders, Henault, Holland, Zeland, and other countreisbeyond the sea, as is aforesaide, together with the wages,rights, profits, and emoluments heretofore accustomed,& as the said Will. Obray at other times hath had andreceived of our said subjects, when he had, used, andexercised the said office of governor, and also with othersuch rights and profits, as hereafter shal more plainlybe declared. And furthermore for our parts we havegiven him, and by these presents do give him, as muchas in us lieth, during our pleasure, ful power, authority,and special commandement, to governe, rule, and causeto be governed and ruled with good justice by himselfe,or by his sufficient lieuetenants or deputies, all and everyour foresaid subjects the common marchants & marinerscomming, remaining, frequenting, passing, & repairingfrom henceforth into the said countreis of Brabant,Flanders, Henault, Holland, Zeland, and other countreyesbeyond the sea, as it is said, and to keep and cause tobe kept, to exercise and maintein, for us and in our place,the said office of governour, and to doe all such thingswhich a faithfull governour ought to do, and to takeknowledge and administration of the causes of the saidcommon marchants and mariners, our subjects, and ofevery of them, and of their causes and quarels moved,or hereafter to be moved in the countreis aforesaid, orwithin the limits & borders therof, and to doe them full& speedy justice. And to reforme, cause reformation,governe, appease, and pacifie all contentions, discords,questions, or debates between those our said subjectsmoved, or to be moved: and to right, redresse, repaire,restore, and amend all transgressions, domages, enterprises, outrages, violences and injuries committed, or tobe committed: and likewise to require, to aske, demand,and receive, restitutions, reparations, restaurations, andamends of our said subjects the common marchants &mariners, or of their factors in the countreis aforesaid.And that, whensoever and as often as it shal please thesaid governor or his deputies, they may in some convenient and honest place within the said countreis makeor cause to be made, somon, and hold in our namejurisdictions, courts, and assemblies: and in our saidname take administration and knowledge of causes, asit is aforesaide, and to hold and keepe pleas, for andin our behalfe, and to make agreements, mediatours,and umpires, to judge, to make decrees, and to ministerjustice, to ordaine, appoint, censure, and constraine oursaide subjects to sweare and take all kind of oathes, whichorder of justice and custome require and affoorde, andto enjoy our authoritie, and to use, execute and accomplish,by way of equitie and justice, and to doe, or cause to bedone all execution and exercise of law and justice; andto ordain, appoint, & establish sixe sergeants or under,to doe the executions & arrests of our said court, by thecommandement of the said governour or of his deputies,or at the request of the partie or otherwise, accordingas the case shall require by their advise, and to dischargeand displace the said sergeants, as shall seeme goodunto him, as often and whensoever as it shall please him,and change them, and appoint and set others in theirroomes, and to require returne and answere of the court,whensoever need shal be, of all causes, quarels, andbusinesses in regard of the said office belonging untous and to our said subjects the common marchants andmariners at all times, and as often as the case shall permitand require: and generally and specially to doe as muchfor us and in our stead, in the cases before mentioned,and which hereafter shalbe declared, as we could doeor cause to be done, could say or require, if we werethere present in our owne person. Moreover wee will,and by the tenour of these presents wee give and grauntunto the saide governour, and to our saide subjects thecommon marchants and mariners, that as oft and whensoever it please them, they may meet and assemble insome honest and convenient place, and by the consent ofthe saide governour to choose and appoynt among themat their pleasure, freely and without danger, certainesufficient and fit persons to the number of twelve or under,which we wil have to be named Justicers, unto the whichJusticers so elected by the saide governour and our saidesubjects, as it is said, and to everie of them, we give andgraunt especiall power and authoritie to sitte and assist incourt, with the said governour or his lieutenants, for theiraide and assistance, and to heare the griefs, complaints,and demands of our said subjects their suites, pleas, andthe state of their causes and quarels whatsoever movedor to be moved unto the ende of their cause, and at therequest of the saide governour, his lieutenants, or any ofthem, to say, propound, and plainely to expresse anddeclare their opinions, according to right and conscience,upon the causes brought before them and by the partiesuttered and declared, and well, lawfully, and faithfully tocounsell and advise the saide governour or his lieutenants,to order and censure, judge and determine, and endethe same justly and equally, according as the case shallpermit and require. And furthermore we wil, that alljust and reasonable statutes, lawes, ordinances, decrees,and constitutions made and established, or to be made andestablished, in the countreys aforesaide, by the consentof the said governour, and of the said Justicers, shalbecorrected, amended, and made, as they shall see to beeexpedient in this behalfe, for the better government of theestate of the common marchants and mariners our saidesubjects, and shalbe held as ratified, firme, acceptable andapproved; and from henceforth we accept, admit, allowand approve them for ratified and confirmed, there tobe firmely and inviolably observed, kept and obeyed.And also, of our farther favour and grace wee will andwe grant, that by the consent of our said governour,our said subjects the common marchants and marinersmay make and set downe in the said countreis, by theircommon consent, as often as they shall thinke good fortheir better government and estate, such just and reasonable lawes, statutes, ordinances, decrees, constitutions,and customes, as they shal thinke expedient in thisbehalfe: which we command to be kept as ratified, confirmed, allowed, & approved, available, and established.Provided alwaies, that they do not nor seeke any thingprejudicial to this present power and authoritie given andgraunted by us to the saide governour, in any poynt orarticle heerein comprised, by any meanes or way whatsoever: in which case if they shoulde doe any thing, orought should happen, we wil that it shal take no place,force, vigour, strength, nor vertue: neither that it shalbeof any effect, but it shalbe abolished, disanulled, andutterly frustrate; and as abolished, disanulled, and utterlyfrustrated, from this time forward, wee holde and takeit, and will hereafter hold and take the same. And soto doe, and put in execution in our name, we have anddoe give full and absolute power, & speciall authority toour said servant William Obray, & to his said lieutenantsAnd likewise, to the end that ye course of marchandisemay be kept in good estate, and that by order of justicea firme and constant rule may be set downe among thoseour said subjects and marchants, we have ordained anddo ordaine, have consented & doe consent, and by thesepresents have given & do give ful power & especiallauthority to our said servant Will. Obray governouraforesaid, that at al time and times when he shal thinkgood, he may ordaine, elect, chuse, and appoint, in thecountreis aforesaid, such ministers, officers, and servitoursas hereafter shalbe named, and such others as he shalthink necessary, and to discharge them, and to changethem, & set others in their roomes, at his good will andpleasure, unto such a number as he shall thinke good andreasonable for the time being to be employed: as namelycorrectors or brokers as many as he shal thinke good, tomake and to witnes the bargaines which are made or tobe made, betweene our said subjects and others withwhom they shal have to do or to deale in the foresaidcountreis: and also as many alnagers to alner andmeasure al kinds of marchandises which they shal buyor sel by the yard: and also as many weighers to weighthe marchandise which shalbe sold or bought by weight:and also so many folders to fold their clothes, and somany packers to pack their packs, and to make theirfardels, maunds, and baskets, and other things needefullfor the defence & preservation of their marchandize. Alwhich ministers, officers, and servitors, so chosen, elected,charged, admitted, and established by the saide governour,as is saide, may take their wages for their paines &attendances upon the said marchants, according to thecustome of the said countreis, and as they have beneaccustomed to take of the said marchants before thesepresents by us given and graunted. And hereupon wehave given and doe give expresse charge and commandement by us and in our names to all our said subjectscommon marchants and mariners, and to every of themwhich shall frequent, come, remaine, passe, repaire, orinhabite within the countreis aforesaid, that they shall notmake contract or bargaine, sell or buy, nor shall not causeany contract or bargaine to be made, nor in the saidcountreis sell or buy any maner of wares, goods, ormarchandises, secretley nor openly, by way of fraude,barat, or deceite whatsoever, with any person or persons,of what estate, countrey, or condition soever they be,without he hath some of the said brokers at the bargainmaking, to present, report, and to testifie the said contracts or bargains before the said governor or others, ifneed require, and strife or contention should grow therofbetweene them: nor to packe or cause to be packed anygoods or marchandises belonging unto them, in packs,bales, or fardels, coffers, chests, maunds, dryfats, orrowles, without having some deputy present thereat: norto take or cause to be taken or set on worke in the saidcountreis, any other brokers, alnagers, weighers, folders,or packers, then the aforesaid so chosen, admitted, established, and ordained by the saide governor, & heretoauthorized in our name, as it is said, under paine offalling into, and incurring of our displeasure, and offorfeiture, and confiscation of all such goods, wares, andmarchandises, which shalbe found to have passed by otherhands or order, then that or those which are before mentioned: the fourth part of which forfeitures and confiscations shall be imployed to the repairing and maintenanceof two chappels founded to the honour of Saint Thomasof Canterburie by our saide subjects, in the townes ofBruges in Flanders, and of Middleborough in Zeland;the other fourth part to us, & our use; the third fourthpart to our said cousin of Burgundie, or the natural Lordof the countrey wherein the saide goods shall be found;and the fourth fourth part to him or them, which shalldiscover, detect, or finde out the saide fraude. And alsothat none of our said subjects shall unlade or cause to beunladen, under any colour nor otherwise, nor unpacke,in the countreis abovesaide, no kind of wares, goods, normarchandises whatsoever, which they shall bring or causeto bee brought into the countreyes aforesaide, commingout of our countreyes, dominions, or obeysance, withoutfirst and beforehand they make the governour or hisdeputies acquainted with their arrivall, and crave leave,and deliver, shewe, and declare their cockets, that it mayduely appeare, that the saide goods and marchandiseshave truly and lawfully payde unto us our rights andcustomes, and not to unpacke them but in the presenceof the saide governour, his lieutenants or deputies, uponpaine of forfaiture, and confiscation of the saide goods,in maner and forme before declared in the foresaidearticle. And if it bee found by the visitation of the saidegovernor, his lieuetenants or deputies, that any goods,wares, or marchandises whatsoever be arrived and discharged in the countreis aforesaid, belonging to our saidesubjectes, not lawfully customed and acquited towarde usof our right and custome, for which they cannot nor arenot able to make any due proofe of our letters of coquet,as is metioned, or if they finde any other fraud: we will,we ordaine, and we grant, that the sayd governour, hislieutenants or deputies may seaze upon the sayd goodson our behalfe, and may confiscate and forfeit the same,distributing the same into foure parts in maner aforesayd.And also wee will, that every one of the sayd packes,fardels, baskets, maunds, cofers, tunnes, bales, roules,and other furnitures and geare, wherein the saydmarchandises shalbe packed, to be sent out of the saidcountreis, shall not be laden upon ships, carts, nor horses,to come into our dominion, without being first sealed witha seale ordayned by us and given by the sayd governour,upon paine to be forfayted, applyed, and confiscated tous and into our hand, if they be found unsigned and notsealed with the seale. And for every piece of marchandisewhich shall be sealed with the sayd seale, they shall payto the sayd sealer two pence of grosse money of Flanders,which shall goe to the profite of the sayd governour.And forasmuch as according to right and conscience, weought not to use the labour, travels, nor service of anyman, without waging, paying, and fully contenting himaccording to reason and equity, especially when we doeappoint any person or persons to doe or cause to be doneso great travels, labours, busines, and executions, as thesewhich are contayned in this present charter, aswell forthe benefit and profit of us and our selves, as for theholesome, perfect, & good government of our sayd subjects: we by the good advise and deliberation of the saydlords of our privie counsell, have granted and given, andas before, doe grant and give, of our sayd grace, to thesayd William Obray our sayd servant and governourabovenamed, during our pleasure, for part of his wagesand fee of the sayd office, one pennie of our money ofEngland of the value of a liver of grosse money ofFlanders, upon al and singuler the goods, wares andmarchandises of our sayd subjects frequenting the saydcountreis, to be levyed, gathered, received, and payedunto the sayd William Obray, or to his deputies, uponthe sayd wares and marchandises belonging unto our saydsubjects buying and selling, or which they shall causeto sell, buy, put away, trucke or exchange in the countreysabovesaid, aswell of the goods and marchandises whichthey shall bring or cause to be brought into the saydcountries, as of all other goods which they shall lade andcarie, or cause to bee caried and conveyed out of thosecountreis into our dominion or elsewhere into any otherpart whatsoever. And to cause the same to be gathered,received, leavied and payed, we have given, and by thesepresents doe give full power and speciall authoritie untothe sayd William Obray, and to his lieutenants anddeputies aforesayd, to leavy, gather, and cause tobee leavied and received the sayd money, in forme andmaner above mentioned, to his profite and use, during ourpleasure: and to enjoy and use the same as his propergoods, without any contradiction, constraining and arresting if neede bee, as well on land, as on the water, oursaid subjects, their sayd goods, and every of them, byway of law and justice, and to cause them to yeelde andpay the sayd money, upon the said goods and marchandises, as is aforesayd. For such is our pleasure, and sowill we have it done without contradiction or impeachmentto him and his, during our pleasure. And also we willthat the sayd William Obray, over and above that whichis sayd, shall take, gather, and receive of our saydsubjects from henceforth yearely, during our pleasure, allsuch and like wages and profits, as he had and receivedof our sayd subjects, in the yeare 1458, when hee heldand exercised the said office of governour, withoutdiminishing or rebating any thing thereof, notwithstandingthis present augmentation made, increased, and done untohim, of our grace and favour: and that hee shall gather,take, and receive the same in such forme and manner, asthe other money above mentioned is to be gathered. Andto the ende that the sayd William Obray may have andtake possession, season, and enterance of the said officeof governour in our name we have and doe place him, bythe delivery of these presents, in possession, season, andentrance of the said office, and of the rights, profits,stipends, wages, and moneis aforesayd, to begin toexercise the sayd office of governour in our name, thefirst day of May next ensuing after the date of thesepresents, for the sayd William Obray to hold and exercise,practise and use the same, during our pleasure, with thesayd wages, moneys, rights, and profites above mentioned,without any contradiction or impeachment. And all andsingular our subjects the common marchants and mariners,which shall be contrary, rebellious, and disobedient to thesaid governour so ordayned by us, to his said lieutenants,to the sayd justicers so chosen, or to any of them, orto any of the statutes, lawes, decrees, sentences, ordinances, and customes, offices, gifts, and grants abovesayd,let them grievously be punished by the sayd governour orhis lieutenants, in this behalfe, according to the quantityof their offences, and the exigencie of the cases. Wedoe sommon, commaund, straitly and expresly enjoineby these presents all and every our saide subjects, thatunto the sayd governour so by us ordained, to hislieutenants, attorneis, or deputies, and also to the saidjusticers, officers, and ministers, in all and everie thethings aforesaid, and others any waie concerning in thisbehalfe our said ordinances, their government and rule,the circumstances and dependances theron that they givetheir attendance, counsayle, comfort, obedience, and aide,diligently without fault or difficulty, surely, safely, fullyand peaceably: without doing, inferring, or inflicting, orsuffering to be done, inferred, or inflicted to them or anyof them in body or goods, any disturbance or impeachment, in any maner whatsoever: but rather if any thingbee done unto them contrary and to the prejudice of thesepresents, they shall remove and cause the same to beremooved, and that which shall be hindered they shallset at free deliverance, upon payne to fall into and toincurre our high displeasure. For such is our pleasureand so will wee have it, notwithstanding anie lettersfalsely crept in, obtayned, or to be obtayned contraryhereunto. And you our subjects, the common marchantsand mariners, so behave your selves, that you may receivecommendation of us for your good obedience, knowingthat such as shall be found doing or to have done the contrary, we will see them so punished without redemption,that they shall bee an example to all rebellious persons.We pray and most instantly require in the ayde of equitie,all others our friends, allies, and well-willers, aswellprinces and potentates, as their justicers, officers,lieutenants, deputies, commissaries, and subjects, andevery of them, in regard of equitie; that they wouldvouchsafe, and that it would please them to give, doe,and lend comfort, ayde, assistance, and prisons if neederequire, to our sayd governour, his lieutenants, commissaries, deputies, justicers, & others our officers andministers aforesayd: and herein wee pray them on ourbehalfe, and in our owne name. And it may please themherein to doe so much, that we may have occasion tothanke them, and to accompt our selves beholding for thesame: and as they would that we should do for them inthe like matter, or in a greater: which we will willinglydoe, if we be required thereunto by them. In witnessewhereof we have caused these our letters to bee madepatents. Witness our selves at Westminster, the sixteenthof April, in the second yere our reigne.', 'A declaration of the Indies and lands discovered, and subdued unto the Emperour, and the king of Portingal: And also of other partes of the Indies and rich countries to be discovered, which the worshipfull M. Robert Thorne merchant of London (who dwelt long in the citie of Sivil in Spaine) exhorted king Henrie the eight to take in hand. MOST EXCELLENT PRINCE,EXPERIENCE prooveth that naturally all princes beedesirous to extend and enlarge their dominions andkingdomes. Wherefore it is not to be marveiled, to seethem every day procure the same, not regarding any cost,perill, and labour, that may thereby chance, but rather itis to be marvelled, if there be any prince content to livequiet with his owne dominions. For surely the peoplewould thinke he lacketh the noble courage and spirit ofall other. The world knoweth that the desires of Princes havebene so fervent to obtaine their purpose, that they haveadventured and prooved things to mans conjecture impossible, the which they have made possible, and also thingsdifficult have made facill: and thus to obtaine theirpurpose, have in maner turned up and downe the wholeworld so many times, that the people inhabiting in thefarthest regions of the Occident have pursued with greatdistresse, labours and perils, to penetrate and enter intothe farthest regions of the Orient: and in likewise thosepeople of the said parts of the Orient have had no lesselabour and desire to enter and penetrate into the farthestland of the Occident, and so following their purchase havenot ceased untill they could passe no farther by reason ofthe great seas. This naturall inclination is cause, that scarsely it maybe said, there is any kingdome stable, nor king quiet, butthat his owne imagination, or other princes his neighboursdoe trouble him. God and nature hath provided to yourGrace, and to your gracious progenitors, this Realme ofEngland, and set it in so fruitfull a place, and within suchlimites, that it should seeme to be a place quiet andaparted from all the foresayd desire. One speciall causeis, for that it is compassed with the Sea: by reasontherof it seemes, this notwithstanding, their desires andnoble courages have beene most commonly like untoothers: and with marvellous great labours, costes andperils, they have travelled and passed the Seas, makingwarre, not onely with Kings and dominions nigh neighbours, but also with them of farre countries, and so havewoonne and conquered many rich and fayre dominions,and amplified this your Graces Realme with great victoryand glory. And also now of late your Grace having likecourage and desire, and not without just cause, to enlargethis your kingdome, and demaund your limits and tributeof the French king, which at that present he restrained,your Grace in person passed with a great power intoFrance, putting your Graces person to great paine andlabour, and without doubt victoriously you had conqueredthe sayd Realme of France, as ye began, if your adversaryhad not reconciled himselfe, and knowledged your Gracesright and title: and so promised truely to pay tributethen due, & fulfill your request in all things, and alsodesired your Grace for peace, the which of your clemencieyou could not refuse. Now I considering this your noble courage and desire,and also perceiving that your Grace may at your pleasure,to your greater glory, by a godly meane, with little cost,perill, or labour to your Grace or any of your subjects,amplifie and inrich this your sayd Realme, I know it ismy bounden duety to manifest this secret unto your Grace,which hitherto, as I suppose, hath beene hid: which is,that with a small number of ships there may bee discovered divers New lands and kingdomes, in the whichwithout doubt your Grace shall winne perpetuall glory,and your subjectes infinite profite. To which places thereis left one way to discover, which is into the North: forthat of the foure partes of the worlde, it seemeth threeparts are discovered by other Princes. For out of Spainethey have discovered all the Indies and Seas Occidentall,and out of Portingall all the Indies and Seas Orientall:so that by this part of the Orient & Occident, they havecompassed the world. For the one of them departingtoward the Orient, and the other toward the Occident,met againe in the course or way of the middest of theday, and so then was discovered a great part of the sameSeas and coastes by the Spaniards. So that now restto be discovered the sayd North parts, the which itseemeth to mee, is onely your charge and duety. Becausethe situation of this your Realme is thereunto neerestand aptest of all other: and also for that you have alreadytaken it in hand. And in mine opinion it will not seemewell to leave so great and profitable an enterprise, seeingit may so easily and with so little cost, labour, anddanger, be followed and obtayned: though heretoforeyour Grace hath made thereof a proofe, & found not thecommodity thereby as you trusted, at this time it shallbe no impediment. For there may be now providedremedies for things, then lacked, and the inconveniencesand lets remooved, that then were cause that your Gracesdesire tooke no full effect, which is, the courses to bechanged, & followed the foresaid new courses. And concerning the mariners, shippes, and provision, an ordermay be devised and taken meete and convenient, muchbetter then hitherto. By reason wherof, and by Godsgrace, no doubt your purpose shall take effect. Surelythe cost herein will be nothing, in comparison to thegreat profit. The labour is much lesse, yea nothing atall, where so great honour and glory is hoped for: andconsidering well the courses, truely the danger & wayis shorter to us, then to Spaine or Portingall, as byevident reasons appereth. And now to declare something of the commodity andutilitie of this Navigation and discoverie: it is very cleereand certaine, that the Seas that commonly men say,without great danger, difficulty and perill, yea rather itis impossible to passe, that those same Seas be navigableand without anie such danger, but that shippes maypasse and have in them perpetuall clerenesse of the daywithout any darkenesse of the night: which thing is agreat commoditie for the navigants, to see at all timesround about them, as well the safegards as dangers, andhow great difference it is betweene the commoditie andperils of other which leese the most part of every foureand twentie houres the said light, and goe in darkenessegroping their way, I thinke there is none so ignorant butperceiveth this more plainely, then it can be expressed.Yea what a vantage shal your Graces subjects have alsoby this light to discover the strange lands, countries,and coastes? For if they that be discovered, to saileby them in darkenesse is with great danger, much morethen the coastes not discovered be daungerous to travellby night or in darkenesse. Yet these dangers or darkenesse hath not letted the Spanyards and Portingals andother, to discover many unknowen Realmes to their greatperill. Which considered (and that your Graces subjectsmay have the same light) it will seeme your Gracessubjects to be without activity or courage, in leavingto doe this glorious and noble enterprise. For they beingpast this litle way which they named so dangerous, (whichmay be two or three leagues before they come to thePole, and as much more after they passe the Pole) itis cleere, that from thence foorth the seas and landesare as temperate as in these partes, and that then it maybe at the will and pleasure of the mariners, to choosewhether they will sayle by the coastes, that be colde,temperate or hote. For they being past the Pole, it isplaine, they may decline to what part they list. If they will goe toward the Orient, they shall injoythe regions of all the Tartarians that extend toward themidday, and from thence they may goe and proceede tothe land of the Chinas, and from thence to the land ofCathaio Orientall, which is of all the maine land mostOrientall that can be reckoned from our habitation. Andif from thence they doe continue their navigation, following the coasts that returne toward the Occident, theyshall fall in with Malaca, and so with all the Indies whichwe call Orientall, and following the way, may returnehither by the Cape of Buona Speransa: and thus theyshall compasse the whole worlde. And if they will taketheir course after they be past the Pole, toward theOccident, they shall goe in the backe side of the newfound land, which of late was discovered by your Gracessubjects, untill they come to the backe side and SouthSeas of the Indies Occidentall. And so continuing theirvoyage they may returne thorow the streight of Magellanto this countrey, and so they compasse also the worldby that way: and if they goe this third way, and afterthey be past the Pole, goe right toward the PoleAntarctike, and then decline toward the lands and Islandssituated between the Tropikes, and under the Equinoctiall,without doubt they shall finde there the richest landesand Islands of the world of golde, precious stones, balmes,spices, and other thinges that we here esteeme most:which come out of strange countries, and may returnethe same way. By this it appeareth, your Grace hath not onely agreat advantage of the riches, but also your subjectsshall not travell halfe of the way that other doe, whichgoe round about as aforesayd.', 'The booke made by the right worshipful M. Robert Thorne in the yeere 1527. in Sivil, to Doctour Ley, Lord ambassadour for king Henry the eight, to Charles the Emperour, being an information of the parts of the world, discovered by him and the king of Portingal: and also of the way to the Moluccaes by the North. RIGHT noble and reverend in &c.I have received yourletters, and have procured and sent to know of yourservant, who, your Lordship wrote, should be sicke inMerchena. I cannot there or els where heare of him,without he be returned to you, or gone to S. Lucar, andshipt. I cannot judge but that of some contagious sicknesse hee died, so that the owner of the house fordefaming his house would bury him secretly, and notbe knowen of it. For such things have often timeshappened in this countrey. Also to write unto your Lordshippe of the new tradeof Spicery of the Emperour, there is no doubt but thatthe Islands are fertile of Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, andCinnamom: and that the said Islands, with other thereabout, abound with golde, Rubies, Diamondes, Balasses,Granates, Jacincts, and other stones & pearles, as allother lands, that are under and neere the Equinoctiall.For we see, where nature giveth any thing, she is nonigard. For as with us and other, that are apartedfrom the said Equinoctiall, our mettals be Lead, Tinne,and Iron, so theirs be Gold, Silver, and Copper. Andas our fruits and graines bee Apples, Nuts, and Corne,so theirs be Dates, Nutmegs, Pepper, Cloves, and otherSpices. And as we have Jeat, Amber, Cristall, Jasper,and other like stones, so have they Rubies, Diamonds,Balasses, Saphyres, Jacincts, and other like. And thoughsome say that of such precious mettals, graines, or kindof spices, and precious stones, the abundance andquantity is nothing so great, as our mettals, fruits orstones above rehearsed: yet if it be well considered, howthe quantitie of the earth under the Equinoctiall to boththe Tropicall lines, (in which space is found the saydGolde, spices and precious stones) is as much in quantity,as almost all the earth from the Tropickes to both thePoles; it cannot be denied but there is more quantity ofthe sayd mettals, fruites, spices, and precious stones,then there is of the other mettals and other things beforerehearsed. And I see that the preciousnes of these thingsis measured after the distance that is between us, andthe things that we have appetite unto. For in thisnavigation of the Spicerie was discovered, that theseIslands nothing set by golde, but set more by a knifeand a nayle of iron, then by his quantitie of Golde: andwith reason, as the thing more necessary for mansservice. And I doubt not but to them should be asprecious our corne and seedes, if they might have them,as to us their spices: & likewise the pieces of glassethat here we have counterfeited are as precious to them,as to us their stones: which by experience is seene daylieby them that have trade thither. This of the riches ofthose countries is sufficient. Touching that your Lordship wrote, whether it maybee profitable to the Emperor or no? it may be withoutdoubt of great profite: if, as the king of Portingal doth,he would become a merchant, and provide shippes andtheir lading, and trade thither alone, and defend thetrade of these Islands for himselfe. But other greaterbusinesse withholdeth him from this. But still, as nowit is begunne to be occupied, it would come to much.For the shippes comming in safetie, there would thithermany every yere, of which to the Emperour is due of allthe wares and jewels that come from thence the fift partfor his custome cleare without any cost. And besidesthis hee putteth in every flote a certaine quantitie ofmoney, of which hee enjoyeth of the gaines pound andpounds like as other adventurers doe. In a fleete ofthree shippes and a Caravel that went from this citiearmed by the marchants of it, which departed in Aprilllast past, I and my partener have one thousand fourehundred duckets that we employed in the sayd fleete,principally for that two English men, friends of mine,which are somewhat learned in Cosmographie, shouldgoe in the same shippes, to bring me certaine relationof the situation of the countrey, and to be expert in thenavigation of those seas, and there to have informationsof many other things, and advise that I desire to knoweespecially. Seeing in these quarters are shippes, andmariners of that countrey, and cardes by which they saile,though much unlike ours, that they should procure tohave the said cards, and learne how they understandthem, and especially to know what navigation they havefor those Islands Northwards, and Northeastward. For if from the sayd Islands the sea did extend, withoutinterposition of land, to saile from the North point tothe Northeast poynt one thousand seven hundred or onethousand eight hundred leagues, they should come tothe New found Islands that we discovered, and so weshould be neerer to the sayd Spicerie by almost twothousand leagues then the Emperour, or the king ofPortingal are. And to advise your Lordship whetherof these Spiceries of the king of Portingal or theEmperours is neerer, and also of the titles that eitherof them hath, and howe our New found lands are partedfrom it, (for that by writing without some demonstration,it were hard to give any declaration of it) I have causedthat your Lordship shall receive herewith a little Mappeor Carde of the world: the which, I feare me, shall putyour Lordship to more labour to understand, then meto make it, onely for that it is made in so litle roomethat it cannot be but obscurely set out, that is desiredto be seene in it, and also for that I am in this sciencelittle expert: Yet to remedy in part this difficulty, it isnecessary to declare to your Lordship my intent, withwhich I trust you shall perceive in this Card part of yourdesire, if, for that I cannot expresse mine intent, withmy declaration I doe not make it more obscure. First, your Lordship knoweth that the Cosmographers have divided the earth by 360 degrees in latitude, and as many in longitude, under the which is comprehended all the roundnes of the earth: the latitude being divided into foure quarters, ninetie degrees amount to every quarter, which they measure by the altitude of the Poles,that is the North and South starres, being from the lineEquinoctiall till they come right under the North starrethe said ninetie degrees: and as much from the sayd lineEquinoctiall to the South starre be other ninety degrees.And as much more is also from either of the sayd starresagayne to the Equinoctiall. Which imagined to beeround, is soone perceived thus, 360 degrees of latitudeto be consumed in the said foure quarters of ninetiedegrees a quarter: so that this latitude is the measureof the worlde from North to South, and from South toNorth. And the longitude, in which are also countedother 360, is counted from West to East, or from Eastto West, as in the Card is set. The sayd latitude your Lordship may see marked and divided in the ende of this Card on the left hand: so that if you would know in what degrees of latitude any region or coast standeth, take a compasse, and set the one foot of the same in the Equinoctial line right against the said region, & apply the other foote of the compasse to the said region or coast, & then set the sayd compasse at the end of the Card, where the degrees are divided. And the one foote of the compasse standing in the line Equinoctial, the other will shew in the scale the degrees of altitude or latitude that the said region is in. Also the longitude of the world I have set out in the nether part of the Card, conteining also 360 degrees: which begin to be counted after Ptoleme and other Cosmographers from an headland called Capo Verde, which isover against a little crosse made in the part Occidental,where the division of the degrees beginneth, and endethin the same Capo Verde. Now to know in what longitude any land is, yourLordship must take a ruler or a compasse, and set theone foot of the compasse upon the land or coast whoselongitude you would know, and extend the other foot ofthe compasse to the next part of one of the transversalllines in the Orientall or Occidental part: which done,set the one foot of the compasse in the said transversalline at the end of the nether scale, the scale of longitude,and the other foot sheweth the degree of longitude thatthe region is in. And your Lordship must understandthat this Card, though little, conteineth the universallwhole world betwixt two collaterall lines, the one in theOccidentall part descendeth perpendicular upon the 175degree, & the other in the Orientall on the 170 degree,whose distance measureth the scale of longitude. Andthat which is without the two said transversall lines, isonely to shew how the Orientall part is joined with theOccident, and Occident with the Orient. For that thatis set without the line in the Oriental part, is the samethat is set within the other line in the Occidentall part:and that that is set without the line in the Occidentallpart, is the same that is set within the line in the Orientallpart, to shew that though this figure of the world inplaine or flatte seemeth to have an end, yet one imaginingthat this sayd Card were set upon a round thing, wherethe endes should touch by the lines, it would plainelyappeare howe the Orient part joyneth with the Occident,as there without the lines it is described and figured. And for more declaration of the said Card, yourLordship shall understand, that beginning on the partOccidental within the line, the first land that is set out,is the maine land and Islands of the Indies of theEmperour. Which maine land or coast goeth Northward, and finisheth in the land that we found, which iscalled here Terra de Labrador. So that it appeareththe sayd land that we found, and the Indies to be allone maine land. The sayd coast from the sayd Indies Southward, asby the Card your Lordshippe may see, commeth to acertaine straight Sea, called Estrecho de todos Santos:by which straight Sea the Spaniards goe to the Spiceries,as I shall declare more at large: the which straight Seais right against three hundred fifteene degrees of longitude, and is of latitude or altitude from the Equinoctiallthree and fifty degrees. The first land from the saydbeginning of the Card toward the Orient are certaineIslands of the Canaries, and Islandes of Capo verde.But the first maine land next to the line Equinoctialis the sayd Capo verde, and from thence Northward bythe straight of this sea of Italie. And so followethSpayne, France, Flanders, Almaine, Denmarke, andNorway, which is the highest parte toward the North.And over against Flanders are our Islands of Englandand Ireland. Of the landes and coastes within thestreights I have set out onely the Regions, dividingthem by lines of their limits, by which plainely I thinkeyour Lordship may see, in what situation everie regionis, and of what highnesse, and with what regions it isjoyned. I doe thinke few are left out of all Europe. Inthe parts of Asia and Affrica I could not so wel makethe sayd divisions: for that they be not so wel knowen,nor need not so much. This I write because in the saidCard be made the said lines & strikes, that your Lordship should understand wherefore they doe serve. Alsoreturning to the foresaid Capo verde, the coast goethSouthward to a Cape called Capo de buona speransa:which is right over against the 60. & 65. degree oflongitude. And by this Cape go the Portingals to theirSpicerie. For from this Cape toward the Orient, is theland of Calicut, as your Lordship may see in the headlandover against the 130. degree. From the sayd Cape ofBuona speransa the coast returneth toward the lineEquinoctial, and passing forth entreth the red sea, &returning out, entreth again into the gulfe of Persia,and returneth toward the Equinoctiall line, till that itcommeth to the headland called Calicut aforesayd, andfrom thence the coast making a gulfe, where is the riverof Ganges, returneth toward the line to a headland calledMalaca, where is the principall Spicerie: & from thisCape returneth and maketh a great gulfe, and after thecoast goeth right toward the Orient, and over againstthis last gulfe and coast be many Islands, which beIslandes of the Spiceries of the Emperour. Upon whichthe Portingals and he be at variance. The sayd coast goeth toward the Orient, and endethright against the 155. degrees, and after returneth towardthe Occident Northward: which coast not yet plainelyknowen, I may joine to the New found lande found byus, that I spake of before. So that I finish with thisbriefe declaration of the Card aforesayd. Well I knowI should also have declared how the coasts within thestraights of the Sea of Italie runne. It is playne thatpassing the streights on the North side of that Sea afterthe coast of Granado, and with that which pertaines toSpaine, is the coast of that which France hath in Italie.And then followeth in one piece all Italie, which landhath an arme of the Sea, with a gulfe which is calledMare Adriaticum. And in the bottome of this gulfe isthe citie of Venice. And on the other part of the saydgulfe is Sclavonia, and next Grecia, then the streits ofConstantinople, and then the sea called Euxinus, whichis within the sayd streights: and comming out of thesayd streights, followeth Turcia major (though now onboth sides it is called Turcia.) And so the coast runnethSouthward to Syria, and over against the sayd Turciaare the Islands of Rhodes, Candie, and Cyprus. Andover against Italie are the Islands of Sicilia and Sardinia.And over against Spaine is Majorca and Minorca. Inthe ende of the gulfe of Syria is Judea. And from thencereturneth the coast toward the Occident, till it commethto the streights where we began, which all is the coastof Affrike and Barbarie. Also your Lordship shall understand that the coastes of the Sea throughout all the world,I have coloured with yellow, for that it may appeare thatall that is within the line coloured yellow, is to beimagined to be maine land or Islands: and all withoutthe line so coloured to bee Sea: whereby it is easie andlight to know it. Albeit in this little roome any otherdescription would rather have made it obscure then cleere.And the sayd coasts of the Sea are all set justly afterthe maner and forme as they lie, as the navigationapproveth them throughout all the Card, save onely thecoastes and Isles of the Spicerie of the Emperour whichis from over against the 160. to the 215. degrees oflongitude, For these coastes and situations of the Islands,every of the Cosmographers and pilots of Portingal &Spayne do set after their purpose. The Spaniards moretowards the Orient, because they should appeare toappertain to the Emperour: & the Portingals moretoward the Occident, for that they should fal within theirjurisdiction. So that the pilots and navigants thither,which in such cases should declare the truth, by theirindustrie do set them falsly every one to favour his prince.And for this cause can be no certaine situation of thatcoast and Islands, till this difference betwixt them beverified. Now to come to the purpose of your Lordshipsdemaund touching the difference between the Emperourand the king of Portingal, to understand it better, I mustdeclare the beginning of this discoverie. Though peradventure your Lordship may say that in that I havewritten ought of purpose, I fall in the proverbe, A geminoovo bellum: But your Lordship commanded me to belarge, and I take licence to be prolixious, and shalbeperadventure tedious, but your Lordship knoweth thatNihil ignorantia verbosius. In the yeere 1484 the king of Portingal minded toarme certaine Carvels to discover this Spicerie. Thenforasmuch as he feared that being discovered, every otherprince woulde sende and trade thither, so that the costand perill of discovering should be his, and the profitecommon: wherefore first hee gave knowledge of this hisminde to all princes Christened, saying that hee wouldseeke amongst the infidels newe possessions of regions,and therefore would make a certaine armie: and thatif any of them would helpe in the cost of the sayd armie,he should enjoy his part of the profite or honour thatshould come of it. And as then this discovering washolden for a strange thing and uncertaine. Nowe theysay, that all the Princes of Christendome answered, thatthey would be no part of such an armie, nor yet of theprofit that might come of it. After the which he gaveknowledge to the Pope of his purpose, and of the answereof all the Princes, desiring him that seeing that nonewould helpe in the costes, that he would judge all thatshould bee found and discovered to be of his jurisdiction,and commannd that none other princes should intermeddletherewith. The Pope sayd not as Christ saith, Quis meconstituit judicem inter vos? He did not refuse, butmaking himselfe as Lord and Judge of all, not onelygranted that all that should be discovered from Orientto Occident, should be the kings of Portingal, but also,that upon great censures no other Prince should discoverbut he. And if they did, all to bee the kings of Portingal.So he armed a fleete, and in the yeere 1497 were discovered the Islands of Calicut, from whence is broughtall the spice he hath. After this in the yere 1492 the king of Spaine willingto discover lands toward the Occident without makingany such diligence, or taking licence of the king ofPortingal, armed certaine Carvels, and then discoveredthis India Occidentall, especially two Islands of the saydIndia, that in this Card I set forth, naming the one laDominica, and the other Cuba, and brought certainegolde from thence. Of the which when the king ofPortingal had knowledge, he sent to the king of Spaine,requiring him to give him the sayd Islands. For thatby the sentence of the Pope all that should be discoveredwas his, and that hee should not proceede further in thediscoverie without his licence. And at the same timeit seemeth that out of Castil into Portingal had gone forfeare of burning infinite number of Jewes that wereexpelled out of Spaine, for that they would not turneto be Christians, and carried with them infinite numberof golde and silver. So that it seemeth that the kingof Spaine answered, that it was reason that the kingof Portingal asked, and that to be obedient to that whichthe Pope had decreed, he would give him the sayd Islandsof the Indies. Nowe for as much as it was decreedbetwixt the sayde kings, that none should receive theothers subjects fugitives, nor their goods, therfore theking of Portingal should pay and returne to the king ofSpaine a million of golde or more, that the Jewes hadcaryed out of Spaine to Portingal, & that in so doinghe would give these Islands, and desist from any morediscovering. And not fulfilling this, he would not onelynot give these Islands, but procure to discover morewhere him thought best. It seemeth that the king ofPortingal would not, or could not with his ease pay thismoney. And so not paying, that he could not let theking of Spaine to discover: so that he enterprised nottoward the Orient where he had begun & found theSpicerie. And consented to the king of Spaine, thattouching this discovering they should divide the worldebetweene them two. And that all that should be discovered from Cape Verde, where this Card beginnethto be counted in the degrees of longitude, to 180 of thesayd scale of longitude, which is halfe the world towardthe Orient, & finisheth in this Card right over againsta litle crosse made at the said 180 degrees, to be theking of Portingals. And all the land from the saidCrosse towarde the Occident, untill it joyneth with theother Crosse in the Orient, which conteineth the otherhundreth and eightie degrees, that is the other halfe ofthe worlde, to be the king of Spaines. So that from theland over against the said hundreth & eighty degreesuntill it finish in the three hundred and sixtie on boththe ends of the Card, is the jurisdiction of the king ofSpaine. So after this maner they divided the worldbetweene them. Now for that these Islands of Spicery fall neere theterme and limites betweene these princes (for as by thesayd Card you may see they begin from one hundredand sixtie degrees of longitude, and ende in 215) itseemeth all that falleth from 160 to 180 degrees, shouldbe of Portingal: and all the rest of Spaine. And forthat their Cosmographers and Pilots coulde not agree inthe situation of the sayde Islandes (for the Portingalsset them all within their 180 degrees, and the Spaniardsset them all without :) and for that in measuring, all theCosmographers of both partes, or what other that everhave bene cannot give certaine order to measure thelongitude of the worlde, as they doe of the latitude: forthat there is no starre fixed from East to West, as arethe starres of the Poles from North to South, but allmooveth with the mooving divine: no maner can beefounde howe certainely it may bee measured, but byconjectures, as the Navigants have esteemed the waythey have gone. But it is manifest that Spaine had thesituation of al the lands from Cape Verde, toward theOrient of ye Portingals to their 180 degrees. And inall their Cardes they never hitherto set the saide Islandswithin their limitation of the sayd 180 degrees, (thoughthey knewe very well of the Islands,) till now that theSpaniards discovered them. And it is knowen that theking of Portingal had trade to these Islands afore, butwould never suffer Portingal to go thither from Calicut:for so much as he knew that it fell out of his dominion:least by going thither there might come some knowledgeof those other Islands of the king of Spaine, but boughtthe cloves of Marchants of that countrey, that broughtthem to Calicut, much deerer then they would have cost,if he had sent for them, thinking after this maner itwould abide alwayes secret. And now that it is discovered he sendes and keepes the Spaniards from thetrade all that he can. Also it should seeme that when this foresaid consentof the division of the worlde was agreed of betweenethem, the king of Portingal had already discoveredcertaine Islandes that lie over against Cape Verde, andalso certaine part of the maine land of India toward theSouth, from whence he fette Brasill, and called it theland of Brasil. So for that all should come in his termeand limites, hee tooke three hundred and seventie leaguesbeyond Cape Verde: and after this, his 180 degrees,being his part of the worlde, should begin in the Carderight over against the 340 degrees, where I have madea little compasse with a crosse, and should finish at the160 degree, where also I have made another little marke.And after this computation without any controversie, theIslands of the spicery fal out of the Portingals domination.So that nowe the Spaniards say to the Portingals, thatif they would beginne their 180 degrees from the saydeCape Verde, to the intent they should extende moretoward the Orient, and so to touch those Islandes of theSpicerie of the Emperour, which is al that is betweenethe two crosses made in this Card, that then the Islandsof Cape Verde and the lande of Brasil that the Portingalsnowe obtaine, is out of the sayd limitation, and that theyare of the Emperours. Or if their 180 degrees they countfrom the 370 leagues beyond the said Cape Verde, toinclude in it the said Islands and lands of Brasil, thenplainely appeareth the said 180 degrees should finish longbefore they come to these Islands of the Spicerie of theEmperour: As by this Carde your Lordship may see.For their limits should begin at the 340 degrees of thisCarde, and ende at the 160 degrees, where I have madetwo little markes of the compasse with crosses inthem. So that plainely it should appeare by reason, that thePortingals should leave these Islands of Cape Verde andland of Brasil, if they would have part of the Spicerie ofthe Emperours: or els holding these, they have no partthere. To this the Portingals say, that they will beginnetheir 180 degrees from the selfe same Cape Verde: forthat it may extende so much more toward the Orient,and touch these Islandes of the Emperours: and wouldwinne these Islandes of Cape Verde and land of Brasilneverthelesse, as a thing that they possessed before theconsent of this limitation was made. So none can verely tell which hath the best reason.They be not yet agreed, Quare sub Judice lis est. But without doubt (by all conjectures of reason) thesayd Islands fall all without the limitation of Portingal,and pertaine to Spaine, as it appeareth by the most partof all the Cardes made by the Portingals, save thosewhich they have falsified of late purposely. But now touching that your Lordship wrote, whetherthat which we discovered toucheth any thing the foresaydcoastes: once it appeareth plainely, that the Newefoundland that we discovered, is all a maine land with theIndies Occidentall, from whence the Emperour hath allthe gold and pearles: and so continueth of coast morethen 5000 leagues of length, as by this Carde appeareth.For from the said New lands it proceedeth toward theOccident to the Indies, and from the Indies returnethtoward the Orient, and after turneth Southward up till itcome to the Straits of Todos Santos, which I reckon tobe more then 5000 leagues. So that to the Indias it should seeme that we havesome title, at least that for our discovering we mighttrade thither as other doe. But all this is nothing neerethe Spicerie. Now then if from the sayd New found lands the Seabe navigable, there is no doubt, but sayling Northwardand passing the Pole, descending to the Equinoctial line,we shall hit these Islands, and it should be a much shorterway, then either the Spaniards or the Portingals have.For we be distant from the Pole but thirty and ninedegrees, and from the Pole to the Equinoctiall be ninetie,the which added together, bee an hundred twenty andnine degrees, leagues 2489. and miles 7440: Where weshould find these Islands. And the Navigation of theSpaniards to the Spicerie is, as by this Carde you maysee, from Spaine to the Islandes of Canarie, and fromthese Islandes they runne over the line EquinoctiallSouthwarde to the Cape of the maine land of the Indians,called the Cape of Saint Augustine, and from this CapeSouthwards to the straites of Todos Santos, in the whichnavigation to the said straites is 1700. or 1800 leagues;and from these Straites being past them, they returnetowarde the line Equinoctiall to the Islands of Spicerie,which are distant from the saide Straites 4200. or 4300.leagues. The navigation of the Portingals to the said Islandesis departing from Portingall Southward towarde the CapeVerde, and from thence to another Cape passing theline Equinoctial called Capo de bona speransa, and fromPortingal to the Cape is 1800 leagues, and from thisCape to the Islands of Spicerie of the Emperour is 2500.leagues. So that this navigation amounteth all to 4300. leagues. So that (as afore is sayd,) if between our New foundlands or Norway, or Island, the seas toward the Northbe navigable, we should goe to these Islands a shorterway by more then 2000. leagues. And though we went not to the sayd Islandes, forthat they are the Emperours or kings of Portingal, weeshoulde by the way and comming once to the lineEquinoctiall, finde landes no lesse riche of golde andSpicerie, as all other landes are under the sayd lineEquinoctiall: and also should, if we may passe under theNorth, enjoy the navigation of all Tartarie. Whichshould be no lesse profitable to our commodities of cloth,then these Spiceries to the Emperour, and king ofPortingal. But it is a generall opinion of all Cosmographers, thatpassing the seventh clime, the sea is all ice, and thecolde so much that none can suffer it. And hithertothey had all the like opinion, that under the line Equinoctiall for much heate the land was unhabitable. Yet since (by experience is proved) no land so muchhabitable nor more temperate. And to conclude, I thinkethe same should be found under the North, if it wereexperimented. For as all judge, Nihil fit vacuum inrerum natura: So I judge, there is no land unhabitable,nor Sea innavigable. If I should write the reason thatpresenteth this unto me, I should be too prolixe, andit seemeth not requisite for this present matter. Godknoweth that though by it I should have no great interest,yet I have had and still have no litle mind of thisbusinesse: So that if I had facultie to my will, it shouldbe the first thing that I woulde understand, even toattempt, if our Seas Northward be navigable to the Pole,or no. I reason, that as some sickenesses are hereditarious, and come from the father to the sonne, so thisinclination or desire of this discoverie I inherited of myfather, which with another marchant of Bristow namedHugh Eliot, were the discoverers of the New foundlands, of the which there is no doubt, (as nowe plainelyappeareth) if the mariners would then have bene ruled,and followed their Pilots minde, the lands of the WestIndies (from whence all the gold commeth) had bene ours.For all is one coast, as by the Carde appeareth, and isaforesayd. Also in this Carde by the coastes where you see C.your Lordship shall understand it is set for Cape orheadland, where I. for Iland, where P. for Port, whereR. for River. Also in all this little Carde I thinkenothing be erred touching the situation of the land, saveonely in these Ilands of Spicerie: which, for that (asafore is sayd) every one setteth them after his minde,there can be no certification how they stand. I doe notdenie, that there lacke many things, that a consummateCarde should have, or that a right good demonstrationdesireth. For there should be expressed all the mountaines and Rivers that are principall of name in the earth,with the names of Portes of the sea, the names of allprincipall cities, which all I might have set, but not inthis Carde, for the litle space would not consent. Your Lordship may see that setting onely the namesalmost of every Region, and yet not of all, the roomeis occupied. Many Islands are also left out, for the saidlack of roome, the names almost of all Portes put tosilence, with the roses of the windes or points of thecompasse: For that this is not for Pilots to sayle by,but a summary declaration of that which your Lordshipcommanded. And if by this your Lordship cannot welperceive the meaning of this Card, of the which I wouldnot marveile, by reason of the rude composition of it,will it please your Lordship to advise mee to make abigger and a better Mappe, or els that I may cause oneto be made. For I know my selfe in this and all othernothing perfect, but Licet semper discens, nunquam tamenad perfectam scientiam perveniens. Also I know, to setthe forme Sphericall of the world in Plano after the truerule of Cosmographie, it would have bene made otherwisethen this is: howbeit the demonstration should not havebene so plaine. And also these degrees of longitude, that I set in thelower part of this card, should have bin set along by theline Equinoctiall, & so then must be imagined. For thedegrees of longitude neere either of the poles are nothingequall in bignesse to them in the Equinoctiall. But theseare set so, for that setting them a long the Equinoctial,it would have made obscure a great part of the map.Many other curiosities may be required, which for thenonce I did not set downe, as well for that the intent Ihad principally was to satisfie your doubt touching thespicerie, as for that I lack leasure and time. I trustyour Lordship correcting that which is erred, will acceptmy good will, which is to doe any thing that I may inyour Lordships service. But from henceforth I knoweyour Lordship will rather commaund me to keepe silence,then to be large, when you shall be wearied with thereading of this discourse. Jesus prosper your estate andhealth.Your LordshipsRobert Thorne 1527.', 'ALSO this Carde and that which I write touching thevariance betweene the Emperour and the king of Portingall, is not to be shewed or communicated there withmany of that court. For though there is nothing init prejudiciall to the Emperour, yet it may be a causeof paine to the maker: as well for that none may makethese Cardes, but certaine appointed and allowed formasters, as for that peradventure it would not sound wellto them, that a stranger should know or discover theirsecretes: and would appeare worst of all, if they understand that I write touching the short way to the spicerieby our Seas. Though peradventure of troth it is not tobe looked to, as a thing that by all opinions is unpossible,and I thinke never will come to effect: and thereforeneither here nor else where is it to be spoken of. For tomove it amongst wise men, it should bee had in derision.And therefore to none I would have written nor spokenof such things, but to your Lordship, to whom boldly Icommit in this all my foolish fantasie as to my self. Butif it please God that into England I may come with yourLordship, I will shew some conjectures of reason, thoughagainst the generall opinion of Cosmographers, by whichshall appeare this that I say not to lacke some foundation.And till that time I beseeche your Lordship let it be putto silence: and in the meane season it may please Godto send our two Englishmen, that are gone to the Spicerie,which may also bring more plaine declaration of thatwhich in this case might be desired. Also I knowe I needed not to have beene so prolixein the declaration of this Carde to your Lordship, ifthe sayd Carde had bene very well made after the rulesof Cosmographie. For your Lordship would soone understand it better then I, or any other that could have madeit: and so it should appeare that I shewed Delphinumnatare. But for that I have made it after my rude maner,it is necessary that I be the declarer or gloser of mineown worke, or els your Lordship should have had muchlabour to understand it, which now with it also cannotbe excused, it is so grossely done. But I knew youlooked for no curious things of mee, and therefore Itrust your Lordship will accept this, and hold me forexcused. In other mens letters that they write they cravepardon that at this present they write no larger: but Imust finish, asking pardon that at this present I write solargely. Jesus preserve your Lordship with augmentationof dignities. Your servant RobertThorne, 1527.', 'Epitaphium M. Roberti Thorni, sepulti in EcclesiaTemplariorum Londini.  ROBERTUS jacet hic Thorne, quem Bristolia quondam Praetoris merito legit ad officium.  Huic etenim semper magnae Respublica curae, Charior & cunctis patria divitiis.  Ferre inopi auxilium, tristes componere lites, Dulce huic consilio quosque juvare fuit.  Qui plus exaudis miserorum voto precesque, Christe huic coeli des regione locum.', "Ordinances, instructions, and advertisements of and for the direction of the intended voyage for Cathay, com piled, made, and delivered by the right worshipfull M. Sebastian Cabota Esquier, governour of the mysterie and companie of the Marchants adventurers for the discoverie of Regions, Dominions, Islands and places unknowen, the 9. day of May, in the yere of our Lord God 1553. and in the 7. yeere of the reigne of our most dread soveraigne Lord Edward the 6. by the grace of God, king of England, Fraunce and Ireland, defender of the faith, and of the Church of England and Ireland, in earth supreame head. FIRST the Captaine general, with the pilot major, themasters, marchants & other officers, to be so knit andaccorded in unitie, love, conformitie, and obedience inevery degree on all sides, that no dissention, variance,or contention may rise or spring betwixt them and themariners of this companie, to the damage or hinderanceof the voyage: for that dissention (by many experiences)hath overthrown many notable intended and likely enterprises and exploits. 2 Item, for as much as every person hath given anothe to be true, faithfull, and loial subjects, and liegemen to the kings most excellent Majestie, his heires andsuccessors, and for the observation of all lawes & statutes,made for the preservation of his most excellent Majestie,& his crown Imperiall of his realmes of England andIreland, and to serve his grace, the Realme, and thispresent voyage truely, and not to give up, intermit, orleave off the said voyage and enterprise untill it shalbeaccomplished, so farre forth as possibilitie and life ofman may serve or extend: Therfore it behoveth everyperson in his degree, as well for conscience, as fordueties sake to remember his said charge, and theaccomplishment thereof. 3 Item, where furthermore every mariner or passengerin his ship hath given like othe to bee obedient to theCaptaine generall, and to every Captaine and masterin his ship, for the observation of these present orderscontained in this booke, and all other which hereaftershalbe made by the 12. counsailers in this present booknamed, or the most part of them, for the better conduction, and preservation of the fleete, and atchievingof the voyage, and to be prompt, ready and obedientin all acts and feates of honesty, reason, and duetie tobe ministred, shewed & executed, in advancement andpreferment of the voyage and exploit: therfore it is convenient that this present booke shall once every weeke(by the discretion of the Captaine) be read to the saidcompanie, to the intent that every man may the betterremember his othe, conscience, duetie and charge. 4 Item, every person by vertue of his othe, to doeeffectually & with good wil (as farre forth as him shallcomplie) all, and every such act and acts, deede anddeeds, as shalbe to him or them from time to timecommanded, committed and enjoyned (during the voyage)by the Captain generall, with the assent of the Counselland assistants, as well in and during the whole Navigation and voyage, as also in discovering and landing,as cases and occasions shall require. 5 Item, all courses in Navigation to be set and kept,by the advice of the Captaine, Pilot major, masters, &masters mates, with the assents of the counsailers andthe most number of them, and in voyces uniformelyagreeing in one to prevaile, and take place, so that theCaptaine generall, shall in all counsailes and assemblieshave a double voyce. 6 Item, that the fleete shal keep together, and notseparate themselves asunder, as much as by winde &weather may be done or permitted, & that the Captaines,Pilots & masters shall speedily come aboord the Admiral,when and as often as he shall seeme to have just causeto assemble them for counsaile or consultation to be hadconcerning the affaires of the fleete and voyage. 7 Item, that the marchants, and other skilful personsin writing, shal daily write, describe, and put in memoriethe Navigation of every day and night, with the points,and observation of the lands, tides, elements, altitudeof the sunne, course of the moon and starres, and thesame so noted by the order of the Master and pilot ofevery ship to be put in writing, the captaine generallassembling the masters together once every weeke (ifwinde and weather shal serve) to conferre all the observations, and notes of the said ships, to the intent it mayappeare wherein the notes do agree, and wherein theydissent, and upon good debatement, deliberation, andconclusion determined, to put the same into a commonleger, to remain of record for the company: the like orderto be kept in proportioning of the Cardes, Astrolabes,and other instruments prepared for the voyage, at thecharge of the companie. 8 Item, that all enterprises and exploits of discoveringor landing to search lies, regions, and such like, to besearched, attempted, and enterprised by good deliberation,and common assent, determined advisedly. And that inall enterprises, notable ambassages, suites, requests, orpresentment of giftes, or presents to Princes, to be doneand executed by the captaine generall in person or bysuch other, as he by common assent shall appoint orassigne to doe or cause to be done in the same. 9 Item, the steward and cooke of every ship, and theirassociats, to give and render to the captaine and otherhead officers of their shippe weekely (or oftner) if it shallseeme requisite, a just or plaine and perfect accompt ofexpenses of the victuals, as wel flesh, fish, bisket, meate,or bread, as also of beere, wine, oyle, or vineger, andall other kinde of victualling under their charge, andthey, and every of them so to order and dispende thesame, that no waste or unprofitable excesse be madeotherwise then reason and necessitie shall command. 10 Item, when any inferiour or meane officer ofwhat degree or condition he shalbe, shalbe tried untrue,remisse, negligent, or unprofitable in or about his officein the voyage, or not to use him selfe in his chargeaccordingly, then every such officer to be punished orremoved at the discretion of the captaine and assistants,or the most part of them, and the person so 'removednot to be reputed, accepted, or taken from the time ofhis remove, any more for an officer, but to remaine insuch condition and place, as hee shall be assigned unto,and none of the companie, to resist such chastisementor worthie punishment, as shalbe ministred unto himmoderately, according to the fault or desert of his offence,after the lawes and common customes of the seas, insuch cases heretofore used and observed. 11 Item, if any Mariner or officer inferiour shalbefound by his labour not meete nor worthie the placethat he is presently shipped for, such person may beeunshipped and put on lande at any place within the kingsMajesties realme & dominion, and one other person moreable and worthy to be put in his place, at the discretionof the captaine and masters, & order to be taken that thepartie dismissed shalbe allowed proportionably the valueof that he shall have deserved to the time of his dismission or discharge, & he to give order with sureties,pawn, or other assurance, to repay the overplus of thathe shall have received, which he shall not have deserved,& such wages to be made with the partie newly placedas shalbe thought reasonable, and he to have the furnitureof al such necessaries as were prepared for the partiedismissed, according to right and conscience. 12 Item, that no blaspheming of God, or detestableswearing be used in any ship, nor communication ofribaldrie, filthy tales, or ungodly talke to be suffred inthe company of any ship, neither dicing, carding, tabling,nor other divelish games to be frequented, wherebyensueth not onely povertie to the players, but also strife,variance, brauling, fighting, and oftentimes murther tothe utter destruction of the parties, and provoking ofGods most just wrath, and sworde of vengeance. Theseand all such like pestilences, and contagions of vices, andsinnes to bee eschewed, and the offenders once monished,and not reforming, to bee punished at the discretion ofthe captaine and master, as appertaineth. 13 Item, that morning and evening prayer, with othercommon services appointed by the kings Majestie, andlawes of this Realme to be read and saide in every shipdaily by the minister in the Admirall, and the marchantor some other person learned in other ships, and the Bibleor paraphrases to be read devoutly and Christianly toGods honour, and for his grace to be obtained, andhad by humble and heartie praier of the Navigantsaccordingly. 14 Item, that every officer is to be charged by Inventorie with the particulars of his charge, and to rendera perfect accompt of the diffraying of the same togetherwith modest & temperate dispending of powder, shot,and use of all kinde of artillery, which is not to bemisused, but diligently to be preserved for the necessarydefence of the fleete and voyage, together with duekeeping of all instruments of your Navigation, and otherrequisites. 15 Item, no liquor to be spilt on the balast, nor filthinesto be left within boord: the cook room, and all otherplaces to be kept cleane for the better health of thecompanie, the gromals & pages to bee brought up according to the laudable order and use of the Sea, as well inlearning of Navigation, as in exercising of that whichto them appertaineth. 16 Item, the liveries in apparel given to the marinersbe to be kept by the marchants, and not to be worne,but by the order of the captaine, when he shall seecause to muster or shewe them in good aray, for theadvancement and honour of the voyage, and the liveriesto bee redelivered to the keeping of the marchants, untillit shal be thought convenient for every person to havethe ful use of his garment. 17 Item, when any mariner or any other passengershal have neede of any necessarie furniture of apparellfor his body, and conservation of his health, the sameshall bee delivered him by the Marchant, at the assignement of the captaine and Master of that shippe, whereinsuch needie person shall be, at such reasonable price asthe same cost, without any gaine to be exacted by themarchants, the value therof to be entred by the marchantin his booke, and the same to be discounted off theparties wages, that so shal receive, and weare the same. 18 Item the sicke, diseased, weake, and visited personwithin boord, to be tendred, relieved, comforted, andholpen in the time of his infirmitie, and every maner ofperson, without respect, to beare anothers burden, andno man to refuse such labour as shall be put to him,for the most benefite, and publike wealth of the voyage,and enterprise, to be atchieved exactly. 19 Item if any person shal fortune to die, or miscaryin the voyage, such apparell, and other goods, as heshall have at the time of his death, is to be kept by theorder of the captaine and Master of the shippe, and aninventorie to be made of it, and conserved to the useof his wife, and children, or otherwise according to hismind, and wil, and the day of his death to be entred inthe Marchants and Stewards bookes: to the intent itmay be knowen what wages he shall have deserved tohis death, and what shall rest due to him. 20 Item, that the Marchants appointed for this presentvoyage, shall not make any shew or sale of any kind ofmarchandizes, or open their commodities to any forreinprinces, or any of their subjects, without the consent,privitie, or agreement of the Captaines, the cape Marchants and the assistants, or foure of them, whereof thecaptaine generall, the Pilot Major, and cape marchantto be Three, and every of the pettie marchants to shewehis reckoning to the cape marchant, when they, or anyof them shall be required: and no commutation or trucketo be made by any of the petie marchants, without theassent abovesaid: and all wares, and commoditiestrucked, bought or given to the companie, by way ofmarchandise, trucke, or any other respect, to be bookedby the marchants, and to be wel ordred, packed, andconserved in one masse entirely, and not to be brokenor altered, until the shippes shall returne to the rightdischarges, and inventorie of al goods, wares, and marchandises so trucked, bought, or otherwise dispended,to be presented to the Governor, Consuls, and Assistantsin London, in good order, to the intent the Kings Majestiemay be truly answered of that which to his grace by hisgrant of corporation is limited, according to our mostbound dueties, and the whole companie also to have thatwhich by right unto them appertaineth, and no embezelment shall be used, but the truth of the whole voyageto bee opened, to the common wealth and benefite of thewhole companie, and mysterie, as appertaineth, withoutguile, fraude, or male engine. 21 Item, no particular person, to hinder or prejudicatethe common stocke of the company, in sale or prefermentof his own proper wares, and things, and no particularemergent or purchase to be employed to any severallprofite, untill the common stocke of the companie shallbe furnished, and no person to hinder the common benefitein such purchases or contingents, as shal fortune to anyone of them, by his owne proper policie, industrie, orchance, nor no contention to rise in that behalfe, by anyoccasion of jewel, stone, pearles, precious mettals, orother things of the region, where it shall chance thesame to rise, or to be found, bought, trucked, permuted,or given: but every person to be bounden in such case,and upon such occasion, by order, and direction, as thegenerall captaine, and the Councell shall establish anddetermine, to whose order and discretion the same isleft: for that of things uncertaine, no certaine rules mayor can be given. 22 Item not to disclose to any nation the state of ourreligion, but to passe it over in silence, without anydeclaration of it, seeming to beare with such lawes, andrites, as the place hath, where you shall arrive. 23 Item for as much as our people, and shippes mayappeare unto them strange and wonderous, and theirsalso to ours: it is to be considered, how they may beused, learning much of their natures and dispositions,by some one such person, as you may first either allure,or take to be brought aboord your ships, and there tolearne as you may, without violence or force, and nowoman to be tempted, or intreated to incontinencie, ordishonestie. 24 Item the person so taken, to be well entertained,used, and apparelled, to be set on land, to the intentthat he or she may allure other to draw nigh to shewethe commodities: and if the person taken may be madedrunke with your beere, or wine, you shal know thesecrets of his heart. 25 Item our people may not passe further into a lande,then that they may be able to recover their pinnesses, orships, & not to credit the faire words of the strangepeople, which be many times tried subtile, and false, norto be drawen into perill of losse, for the desire of golde,silver, or riches, and esteeme your owne commoditiesabove al other, and in countenance shew not much todesire the forren commodities: neverthelesse take themas for friendship, or by way of permutation. 26 Item every nation and region is to be consideredadvisedly, & not to provoke them by any disdaine,laughing, contempt, or such like, but to use them withprudent circumspection, with al gentlenes, and curtesie,and not to tary long in one place, untill you shall haveattained the most worthy place yt may be found, insuch sort, as you may returne wt victuals sufficientprosperously. 27 Item the names of the people of every Island, areto be taken in writing, with the commodities, andincommodities of the same, their natures, qualities, anddispositions, the site of the same, and what things theyare most desirous of, & what commodities they wil mostwillingly depart with, & what mettals they have in hils,mountaines, streames, or rivers, in, or under the earth. 28 Item if people shal appeare gathering of stones,gold, mettall, or other like, on the sand, your pinnessesmay drawe nigh, marking what things they gather, usingor playing upon the drumme, or such other instruments,as may allure them to harkening, to fantasie, or desireto see, and heare your instruments and voyces, but keepeyou out of danger, and shewe to them no poynt or signeof rigour and hostilitie. 29 Item if you shall be invited into any Lords or Rulershouse, to dinner, or other parliance, goe in such orderof strength, that you may be stronger then they, and bewarie of woods and ambushes, and that your weaponsbe not out of your possessions. 30 Item if you shall see them weare Lyons or Bearesskinnes, having long bowes, and arrowes, be not afraidof that sight: for such be worne oftentimes more to fearestrangers, then for any other cause. 31 Item there are people that can swimme in the sea,havens, & rivers, naked, having bowes and shafts,coveting to draw nigh your ships, which if they shal findenot wel watched, or warded, they wil assault, desirousof the bodies of men, which they covet for meate: if youresist them, they dive, and so will flee, and thereforediligent watch is to be kept both day & night, in someIslands. 32 Item if occasion shal serve, that you may giveadvertisements of your proceedings in such things asmay correspond to the expectation of the company, andlikelihood of successe in the voyage, passing such dangersof the seas, perils of ice, intollerable coldes, and otherimpediments, which by sundry authors & writers, haveministred matter of suspition in some heads, that thisvoyage could not succede for the extremitie of the Northpole, lacke of passage, & such like, which have causedwavering minds, and doubtful heads, not onely to withdraw themselves from the adventure of this voyage, butalso disswaded others from the same, the certaintiewherof, when you shall have tried by experience, (mostcertaine Master of all worldly knowledge) then fordeclaration of the trueth, which you shall have experted,you may by common assent of counsell, sende either byland, or otherwaies, such two or one person, to bringthe same by credite, as you shal think may passe insafetie: which sending is not to be done, but upon urgentcauses, in likely successe of the voyage, in finding ofpassage, in towardlines of beneficiall traffike, or suchother like, whereby the company being advertised of yourestates and proceedings, may further provide, foresee,and determine that which may seeme most good andbeneficiall for the publike wealth of the same: eitherproviding before hand such things, as shall bee requisitefor the continuance of the voyage, or else otherwise todispose as occasion shall serve: in which things yourwisedomes and discretions are to be used, and shewed,and the contents of this capitule, by you much to bepondred, for that you be not ignorant, how many persons,as well the kings Majestie, the Lords of his honorableCounsel, this whole companie, as also your wives,children, kinsfolkes, allies, friends and familiars, bereplenished in their hearts with ardent desire to learneand know your estates, conditions, and welfares, andin what likelihood you be in, to obtain this notable enterprise, which is hoped no lesse to succeed to you, thenthe Orient or Occident Indias have to the high benefiteof the Emperour, and kings of Portingal, whose subjectsindustries, and travailes by sea, have inriched them, bythose lands and Islands, which were to all Cosmographers, and other writers both unknowne, and also byapparances of reason voide of experience thought andreputed unhabitable for extremities of heates, and colds,and yet indeed tried most rich, peopled, temperate, andso commodious, as all Europe hath not the like. 33 Item no conspiracies, parttakings, factions, falsetales, untrue reports, which be the very seedes, and fruitsof contention, discord, & confusion, by evill tongues tobe suffered, but the same, & all other ungodlines to bechastened charitably with brotherly love, and alwaiesobedience to be used and practised by al persons in theirdegrees, not only for duetie and conscience sake towardsGod, under whose mercifull hand navigants above allother creatures naturally bee most nigh, and vicine, butalso for prudent and worldly pollicie, and publike weale,considering and alwaies having present in your mindesthat you be all one most royall kings subjects, andnaturals, with daily remembrance of the great importanceof the voyage, the honour, glorie, praise, and benefitethat depend of, and upon the same, toward the commonwealth of this noble Realme, the advancement of youthe travailers therein, your wives, and children, and soto endevour your selves as that you may satisfie theexpectation of them, who at their great costs, charges,and expenses, have so furnished you in good sort, andplentie of all necessaries, as the like was never in anyrealme seene, used, or knowen requisite and needful forsuch an exploit, which is most likely to be atchieved, andbrought to good effect, if every person in his vocationshall endevour himselfe according to his charge, and mostbounden duetie: praying the living God, to give youhis grace, to accomplish your charge to his glorie, whosemerciful hand shal prosper your voyage, and preserveyou from all dangers. In witnes whereof I Sebastian Cabota, Governouraforesaide, to these present ordinances, have subscribedmy name, and put my seale, the day and yeere abovewritten. The names of the twelve Counsellors appointed in this voyage.1 SIR Hugh Willoughby Knight, Captaine generall. 2 Richard Chancelour Captaine of the Edward Bonaventure, and Pilot generall of the fleete. 3 George Burton Cape marchant. 4 Master Richard Stafford Minister. 5 Thomas Langlie Marchant. 6 James Dalabere Gentleman. 7 William Gefferson Master of the Bona Speranza Admirall. 8 Stephen Borrough Master of the Edward Bonaventure. 9 Cornelius Durfurth Master of the Confidentia. 10 Roger Wilson. Masters mates. 11 John Buckland. 12 Richard Ingram.", "FIRST the Captaine general, with the pilot major, themasters, marchants & other officers, to be so knit andaccorded in unitie, love, conformitie, and obedience inevery degree on all sides, that no dissention, variance,or contention may rise or spring betwixt them and themariners of this companie, to the damage or hinderanceof the voyage: for that dissention (by many experiences)hath overthrown many notable intended and likely enterprises and exploits. 2 Item, for as much as every person hath given anothe to be true, faithfull, and loial subjects, and liegemen to the kings most excellent Majestie, his heires andsuccessors, and for the observation of all lawes & statutes,made for the preservation of his most excellent Majestie,& his crown Imperiall of his realmes of England andIreland, and to serve his grace, the Realme, and thispresent voyage truely, and not to give up, intermit, orleave off the said voyage and enterprise untill it shalbeaccomplished, so farre forth as possibilitie and life ofman may serve or extend: Therfore it behoveth everyperson in his degree, as well for conscience, as fordueties sake to remember his said charge, and theaccomplishment thereof. 3 Item, where furthermore every mariner or passengerin his ship hath given like othe to bee obedient to theCaptaine generall, and to every Captaine and masterin his ship, for the observation of these present orderscontained in this booke, and all other which hereaftershalbe made by the 12. counsailers in this present booknamed, or the most part of them, for the better conduction, and preservation of the fleete, and atchievingof the voyage, and to be prompt, ready and obedientin all acts and feates of honesty, reason, and duetie tobe ministred, shewed & executed, in advancement andpreferment of the voyage and exploit: therfore it is convenient that this present booke shall once every weeke(by the discretion of the Captaine) be read to the saidcompanie, to the intent that every man may the betterremember his othe, conscience, duetie and charge. 4 Item, every person by vertue of his othe, to doeeffectually & with good wil (as farre forth as him shallcomplie) all, and every such act and acts, deede anddeeds, as shalbe to him or them from time to timecommanded, committed and enjoyned (during the voyage)by the Captain generall, with the assent of the Counselland assistants, as well in and during the whole Navigation and voyage, as also in discovering and landing,as cases and occasions shall require. 5 Item, all courses in Navigation to be set and kept,by the advice of the Captaine, Pilot major, masters, &masters mates, with the assents of the counsailers andthe most number of them, and in voyces uniformelyagreeing in one to prevaile, and take place, so that theCaptaine generall, shall in all counsailes and assemblieshave a double voyce. 6 Item, that the fleete shal keep together, and notseparate themselves asunder, as much as by winde &weather may be done or permitted, & that the Captaines,Pilots & masters shall speedily come aboord the Admiral,when and as often as he shall seeme to have just causeto assemble them for counsaile or consultation to be hadconcerning the affaires of the fleete and voyage. 7 Item, that the marchants, and other skilful personsin writing, shal daily write, describe, and put in memoriethe Navigation of every day and night, with the points,and observation of the lands, tides, elements, altitudeof the sunne, course of the moon and starres, and thesame so noted by the order of the Master and pilot ofevery ship to be put in writing, the captaine generallassembling the masters together once every weeke (ifwinde and weather shal serve) to conferre all the observations, and notes of the said ships, to the intent it mayappeare wherein the notes do agree, and wherein theydissent, and upon good debatement, deliberation, andconclusion determined, to put the same into a commonleger, to remain of record for the company: the like orderto be kept in proportioning of the Cardes, Astrolabes,and other instruments prepared for the voyage, at thecharge of the companie. 8 Item, that all enterprises and exploits of discoveringor landing to search lies, regions, and such like, to besearched, attempted, and enterprised by good deliberation,and common assent, determined advisedly. And that inall enterprises, notable ambassages, suites, requests, orpresentment of giftes, or presents to Princes, to be doneand executed by the captaine generall in person or bysuch other, as he by common assent shall appoint orassigne to doe or cause to be done in the same. 9 Item, the steward and cooke of every ship, and theirassociats, to give and render to the captaine and otherhead officers of their shippe weekely (or oftner) if it shallseeme requisite, a just or plaine and perfect accompt ofexpenses of the victuals, as wel flesh, fish, bisket, meate,or bread, as also of beere, wine, oyle, or vineger, andall other kinde of victualling under their charge, andthey, and every of them so to order and dispende thesame, that no waste or unprofitable excesse be madeotherwise then reason and necessitie shall command. 10 Item, when any inferiour or meane officer ofwhat degree or condition he shalbe, shalbe tried untrue,remisse, negligent, or unprofitable in or about his officein the voyage, or not to use him selfe in his chargeaccordingly, then every such officer to be punished orremoved at the discretion of the captaine and assistants,or the most part of them, and the person so 'removednot to be reputed, accepted, or taken from the time ofhis remove, any more for an officer, but to remaine insuch condition and place, as hee shall be assigned unto,and none of the companie, to resist such chastisementor worthie punishment, as shalbe ministred unto himmoderately, according to the fault or desert of his offence,after the lawes and common customes of the seas, insuch cases heretofore used and observed. 11 Item, if any Mariner or officer inferiour shalbefound by his labour not meete nor worthie the placethat he is presently shipped for, such person may beeunshipped and put on lande at any place within the kingsMajesties realme & dominion, and one other person moreable and worthy to be put in his place, at the discretionof the captaine and masters, & order to be taken that thepartie dismissed shalbe allowed proportionably the valueof that he shall have deserved to the time of his dismission or discharge, & he to give order with sureties,pawn, or other assurance, to repay the overplus of thathe shall have received, which he shall not have deserved,& such wages to be made with the partie newly placedas shalbe thought reasonable, and he to have the furnitureof al such necessaries as were prepared for the partiedismissed, according to right and conscience. 12 Item, that no blaspheming of God, or detestableswearing be used in any ship, nor communication ofribaldrie, filthy tales, or ungodly talke to be suffred inthe company of any ship, neither dicing, carding, tabling,nor other divelish games to be frequented, wherebyensueth not onely povertie to the players, but also strife,variance, brauling, fighting, and oftentimes murther tothe utter destruction of the parties, and provoking ofGods most just wrath, and sworde of vengeance. Theseand all such like pestilences, and contagions of vices, andsinnes to bee eschewed, and the offenders once monished,and not reforming, to bee punished at the discretion ofthe captaine and master, as appertaineth. 13 Item, that morning and evening prayer, with othercommon services appointed by the kings Majestie, andlawes of this Realme to be read and saide in every shipdaily by the minister in the Admirall, and the marchantor some other person learned in other ships, and the Bibleor paraphrases to be read devoutly and Christianly toGods honour, and for his grace to be obtained, andhad by humble and heartie praier of the Navigantsaccordingly. 14 Item, that every officer is to be charged by Inventorie with the particulars of his charge, and to rendera perfect accompt of the diffraying of the same togetherwith modest & temperate dispending of powder, shot,and use of all kinde of artillery, which is not to bemisused, but diligently to be preserved for the necessarydefence of the fleete and voyage, together with duekeeping of all instruments of your Navigation, and otherrequisites. 15 Item, no liquor to be spilt on the balast, nor filthinesto be left within boord: the cook room, and all otherplaces to be kept cleane for the better health of thecompanie, the gromals & pages to bee brought up according to the laudable order and use of the Sea, as well inlearning of Navigation, as in exercising of that whichto them appertaineth. 16 Item, the liveries in apparel given to the marinersbe to be kept by the marchants, and not to be worne,but by the order of the captaine, when he shall seecause to muster or shewe them in good aray, for theadvancement and honour of the voyage, and the liveriesto bee redelivered to the keeping of the marchants, untillit shal be thought convenient for every person to havethe ful use of his garment. 17 Item, when any mariner or any other passengershal have neede of any necessarie furniture of apparellfor his body, and conservation of his health, the sameshall bee delivered him by the Marchant, at the assignement of the captaine and Master of that shippe, whereinsuch needie person shall be, at such reasonable price asthe same cost, without any gaine to be exacted by themarchants, the value therof to be entred by the marchantin his booke, and the same to be discounted off theparties wages, that so shal receive, and weare the same. 18 Item the sicke, diseased, weake, and visited personwithin boord, to be tendred, relieved, comforted, andholpen in the time of his infirmitie, and every maner ofperson, without respect, to beare anothers burden, andno man to refuse such labour as shall be put to him,for the most benefite, and publike wealth of the voyage,and enterprise, to be atchieved exactly. 19 Item if any person shal fortune to die, or miscaryin the voyage, such apparell, and other goods, as heshall have at the time of his death, is to be kept by theorder of the captaine and Master of the shippe, and aninventorie to be made of it, and conserved to the useof his wife, and children, or otherwise according to hismind, and wil, and the day of his death to be entred inthe Marchants and Stewards bookes: to the intent itmay be knowen what wages he shall have deserved tohis death, and what shall rest due to him. 20 Item, that the Marchants appointed for this presentvoyage, shall not make any shew or sale of any kind ofmarchandizes, or open their commodities to any forreinprinces, or any of their subjects, without the consent,privitie, or agreement of the Captaines, the cape Marchants and the assistants, or foure of them, whereof thecaptaine generall, the Pilot Major, and cape marchantto be Three, and every of the pettie marchants to shewehis reckoning to the cape marchant, when they, or anyof them shall be required: and no commutation or trucketo be made by any of the petie marchants, without theassent abovesaid: and all wares, and commoditiestrucked, bought or given to the companie, by way ofmarchandise, trucke, or any other respect, to be bookedby the marchants, and to be wel ordred, packed, andconserved in one masse entirely, and not to be brokenor altered, until the shippes shall returne to the rightdischarges, and inventorie of al goods, wares, and marchandises so trucked, bought, or otherwise dispended,to be presented to the Governor, Consuls, and Assistantsin London, in good order, to the intent the Kings Majestiemay be truly answered of that which to his grace by hisgrant of corporation is limited, according to our mostbound dueties, and the whole companie also to have thatwhich by right unto them appertaineth, and no embezelment shall be used, but the truth of the whole voyageto bee opened, to the common wealth and benefite of thewhole companie, and mysterie, as appertaineth, withoutguile, fraude, or male engine. 21 Item, no particular person, to hinder or prejudicatethe common stocke of the company, in sale or prefermentof his own proper wares, and things, and no particularemergent or purchase to be employed to any severallprofite, untill the common stocke of the companie shallbe furnished, and no person to hinder the common benefitein such purchases or contingents, as shal fortune to anyone of them, by his owne proper policie, industrie, orchance, nor no contention to rise in that behalfe, by anyoccasion of jewel, stone, pearles, precious mettals, orother things of the region, where it shall chance thesame to rise, or to be found, bought, trucked, permuted,or given: but every person to be bounden in such case,and upon such occasion, by order, and direction, as thegenerall captaine, and the Councell shall establish anddetermine, to whose order and discretion the same isleft: for that of things uncertaine, no certaine rules mayor can be given. 22 Item not to disclose to any nation the state of ourreligion, but to passe it over in silence, without anydeclaration of it, seeming to beare with such lawes, andrites, as the place hath, where you shall arrive. 23 Item for as much as our people, and shippes mayappeare unto them strange and wonderous, and theirsalso to ours: it is to be considered, how they may beused, learning much of their natures and dispositions,by some one such person, as you may first either allure,or take to be brought aboord your ships, and there tolearne as you may, without violence or force, and nowoman to be tempted, or intreated to incontinencie, ordishonestie. 24 Item the person so taken, to be well entertained,used, and apparelled, to be set on land, to the intentthat he or she may allure other to draw nigh to shewethe commodities: and if the person taken may be madedrunke with your beere, or wine, you shal know thesecrets of his heart. 25 Item our people may not passe further into a lande,then that they may be able to recover their pinnesses, orships, & not to credit the faire words of the strangepeople, which be many times tried subtile, and false, norto be drawen into perill of losse, for the desire of golde,silver, or riches, and esteeme your owne commoditiesabove al other, and in countenance shew not much todesire the forren commodities: neverthelesse take themas for friendship, or by way of permutation. 26 Item every nation and region is to be consideredadvisedly, & not to provoke them by any disdaine,laughing, contempt, or such like, but to use them withprudent circumspection, with al gentlenes, and curtesie,and not to tary long in one place, untill you shall haveattained the most worthy place yt may be found, insuch sort, as you may returne wt victuals sufficientprosperously. 27 Item the names of the people of every Island, areto be taken in writing, with the commodities, andincommodities of the same, their natures, qualities, anddispositions, the site of the same, and what things theyare most desirous of, & what commodities they wil mostwillingly depart with, & what mettals they have in hils,mountaines, streames, or rivers, in, or under the earth. 28 Item if people shal appeare gathering of stones,gold, mettall, or other like, on the sand, your pinnessesmay drawe nigh, marking what things they gather, usingor playing upon the drumme, or such other instruments,as may allure them to harkening, to fantasie, or desireto see, and heare your instruments and voyces, but keepeyou out of danger, and shewe to them no poynt or signeof rigour and hostilitie. 29 Item if you shall be invited into any Lords or Rulershouse, to dinner, or other parliance, goe in such orderof strength, that you may be stronger then they, and bewarie of woods and ambushes, and that your weaponsbe not out of your possessions. 30 Item if you shall see them weare Lyons or Bearesskinnes, having long bowes, and arrowes, be not afraidof that sight: for such be worne oftentimes more to fearestrangers, then for any other cause. 31 Item there are people that can swimme in the sea,havens, & rivers, naked, having bowes and shafts,coveting to draw nigh your ships, which if they shal findenot wel watched, or warded, they wil assault, desirousof the bodies of men, which they covet for meate: if youresist them, they dive, and so will flee, and thereforediligent watch is to be kept both day & night, in someIslands. 32 Item if occasion shal serve, that you may giveadvertisements of your proceedings in such things asmay correspond to the expectation of the company, andlikelihood of successe in the voyage, passing such dangersof the seas, perils of ice, intollerable coldes, and otherimpediments, which by sundry authors & writers, haveministred matter of suspition in some heads, that thisvoyage could not succede for the extremitie of the Northpole, lacke of passage, & such like, which have causedwavering minds, and doubtful heads, not onely to withdraw themselves from the adventure of this voyage, butalso disswaded others from the same, the certaintiewherof, when you shall have tried by experience, (mostcertaine Master of all worldly knowledge) then fordeclaration of the trueth, which you shall have experted,you may by common assent of counsell, sende either byland, or otherwaies, such two or one person, to bringthe same by credite, as you shal think may passe insafetie: which sending is not to be done, but upon urgentcauses, in likely successe of the voyage, in finding ofpassage, in towardlines of beneficiall traffike, or suchother like, whereby the company being advertised of yourestates and proceedings, may further provide, foresee,and determine that which may seeme most good andbeneficiall for the publike wealth of the same: eitherproviding before hand such things, as shall bee requisitefor the continuance of the voyage, or else otherwise todispose as occasion shall serve: in which things yourwisedomes and discretions are to be used, and shewed,and the contents of this capitule, by you much to bepondred, for that you be not ignorant, how many persons,as well the kings Majestie, the Lords of his honorableCounsel, this whole companie, as also your wives,children, kinsfolkes, allies, friends and familiars, bereplenished in their hearts with ardent desire to learneand know your estates, conditions, and welfares, andin what likelihood you be in, to obtain this notable enterprise, which is hoped no lesse to succeed to you, thenthe Orient or Occident Indias have to the high benefiteof the Emperour, and kings of Portingal, whose subjectsindustries, and travailes by sea, have inriched them, bythose lands and Islands, which were to all Cosmographers, and other writers both unknowne, and also byapparances of reason voide of experience thought andreputed unhabitable for extremities of heates, and colds,and yet indeed tried most rich, peopled, temperate, andso commodious, as all Europe hath not the like. 33 Item no conspiracies, parttakings, factions, falsetales, untrue reports, which be the very seedes, and fruitsof contention, discord, & confusion, by evill tongues tobe suffered, but the same, & all other ungodlines to bechastened charitably with brotherly love, and alwaiesobedience to be used and practised by al persons in theirdegrees, not only for duetie and conscience sake towardsGod, under whose mercifull hand navigants above allother creatures naturally bee most nigh, and vicine, butalso for prudent and worldly pollicie, and publike weale,considering and alwaies having present in your mindesthat you be all one most royall kings subjects, andnaturals, with daily remembrance of the great importanceof the voyage, the honour, glorie, praise, and benefitethat depend of, and upon the same, toward the commonwealth of this noble Realme, the advancement of youthe travailers therein, your wives, and children, and soto endevour your selves as that you may satisfie theexpectation of them, who at their great costs, charges,and expenses, have so furnished you in good sort, andplentie of all necessaries, as the like was never in anyrealme seene, used, or knowen requisite and needful forsuch an exploit, which is most likely to be atchieved, andbrought to good effect, if every person in his vocationshall endevour himselfe according to his charge, and mostbounden duetie: praying the living God, to give youhis grace, to accomplish your charge to his glorie, whosemerciful hand shal prosper your voyage, and preserveyou from all dangers. In witnes whereof I Sebastian Cabota, Governouraforesaide, to these present ordinances, have subscribedmy name, and put my seale, the day and yeere abovewritten.", 'The names of the twelve Counsellors appointed in this voyage.1 SIR Hugh Willoughby Knight, Captaine generall. 2 Richard Chancelour Captaine of the Edward Bonaventure, and Pilot generall of the fleete. 3 George Burton Cape marchant. 4 Master Richard Stafford Minister. 5 Thomas Langlie Marchant. 6 James Dalabere Gentleman. 7 William Gefferson Master of the Bona Speranza Admirall. 8 Stephen Borrough Master of the Edward Bonaventure. 9 Cornelius Durfurth Master of the Confidentia. 10 Roger Wilson. Masters mates. 11 John Buckland. 12 Richard Ingram.', 'The copie of the letters missive, which the right noble Prince Edward the sixt sent to the Kings, Princes, and other Potentates, inhabiting the Northeast partes of the worlde, toward the mighty Empire of Cathay, at such time as Sir Hugh Willoughby knight, and Richard Chancelor, with their company, attempted their voyage thither in the yeere of Christ 1553. and the seventh and last yeere of his raigne. EDWARD the sixt, by the grace of God, King of England,France, and Ireland, &c. To all Kings, Princes, Rulers,Judges, and Governours of the earth, and all other havingany excellent dignitie on the same, in all places underthe universall heaven: peace, tranquillitie, and honourbe unto you, and your lands and regions, which are underyour dominions, and to every of you, as is convenient. Forasmuch as the great and Almightie God hath givenunto mankinde, above all other living creatures, suchan heart and desire, that every man desireth to joinefriendship with other, to love, and be loved, also to giveand receive mutuall benefites: it is therefore the duetyof all men, according to their power, to maintaine andincrease this desire in every man, with well deservingto all men, and especially to shew this good affectionto such, as being moved with this desire, come unto themfrom farre countreis. For how much the longer voyagethey have attempted for this intent, so much the moredoe they thereby declare that this desire hath bene ardentin them. Furthermore also, the examples of our fathersand predecessors doe invite us hereunto, forasmuch asthey have ever gently and lovingly intreated such as offriendly mind came to them, aswell from Countries nearehand, as farre remote, commending themselves to theirprotection. And if it be right and equity to shew suchhumanitie toward all men, doubtlesse the same oughtchiefly to be shewed to marchants, who wandering aboutthe world, search both the land and the sea, to carrysuch good and profitable things, as are found in theirCountries, to remote regions and kingdomes, and againeto bring from the same, such things as they find therecommodious for their owne Countries: both aswell thatthe people, to whom they goe, may not be destitute ofsuch commodities as their Countries bring not foorth tothem, as that also they may be partakers of such things,whereof they abound. For the God of heaven and earthgreatly providing for mankinde, would not that all thingsshould be found in one region, to the ende that one shouldhave neede of another, that by this meanes friendshipmight be established among all men, and every one seeketo gratifie all. For the establishing and furtherance ofwhich universall amitie, certaine men of our Realme,mooved heereunto by the said desire, have instituted andtaken upon them a voyage by sea into farre Countreis,to the intent that betweene our people and them, a waymay bee opened to bring in, and cary out marchandises,desiring us to further their enterprise. Who assentingto their petition, have licensed the right valiant andworthy Sir Hugh Willoughby, knight, and other ourtrusty and faithfull servants, which are with him,according to their desire, to goe to countreis to themheeretofore unknowen, aswell to seeke such things aswe lacke, as also to cary unto them from our regions,such things as they lacke. So that hereby not onelycommoditie may ensue both to them and us, but alsoan indissoluble and perpetuall league of friendship beestablished betweene us both, while they permit us totake of their things, such whereof they have abundancein their regions, and we againe grant them suchthings of ours, whereof they are destitute. We therforedesire you kings & princes, and al other, to whom thereis any power on the earth, to permit unto these ourservants free passage by your regions and dominions:for they shall not touch any thing of yours unwillingunto you. Consider you that they also are men. Iftherefore they shall stand in neede of any thing, we desireyou of all humanitie, and for the nobilitie which is inyou, to ayde and helpe them with such things as theylacke, receiving againe of them such things as they shallbee able to give you in recompense. Shew your selvesso towards them, as you would that we and our subjectsshould shewe ourselves towards your servants, if at anytime they shall passe by our regions. Thus doing, we promise you by the God of all thingsthat are contained in heaven, earth, and the Sea, and bythe life and tranquillitie of our kingdomes, that we willwith like humanitie accept your servants, if at any timethey shall come to our kingdomes, where they shall asfriendly and gently bee entertained, as if they were bornein our Dominions, that wee may hereby recompence thefavour and benignitie which you have shewed to ourmen. Thus after we have desired you Kings and princes,&c. with all humanity and favour, to entertaine ourwelbeloved servants, we will pray our Almighty God, tograunt you long life, and peace, which never shall haveende. Written in London, which is the chiefe Citie ofour kingdome, in the yeere from the creation of the world,5515. in the moneth of Iiar, the fourteenth day of themoneth, and seventh yeere of our reigne. This letter was written also in Greeke, and divers otherlanguages.', 'The true copie of a note found written in one of the two ships, to wit, the Speranza, which wintred in Lappia, where sir Hugh Willoughby and all his companie died, being frozen to death. Anno 1553. THE voiage intended for the discoverie of Cathay, anddivers other regions, dominions, Islands, and placesunknowen, set forth by the right worshipful, masterSebastian Cabota Esquire, and Governour of the mysterieand company of the Marchants Adventurers of the citieof London: which fleete being furnished, did set forththe tenth day of May, 1553. and in the seventh yeereof our most dread Soveraigne Lord, and King, Edwardthe sixt.The names of the shippes of the fleete, and of theirburden, together with the names of the Captaines, and Counsellors, Pilot Major, Masters of the ships, Marchants, with other officers, and Mariners, as hereafter followeth. The Bona Esperanza, Admirall of the fleete, of 120.tunnes, having with her a pinnesse, and a boate. Sir Hugh Willoughby, knight, Captaine generall ofthe fleete. William Gefferson, Master of the shippe. Roger Wilson, his Mate. William Gittons, Charles Barret, Gabriel Willoughby,John Andrews, Alexander Woodfoord, Ralph Chatterton,Marchants.Mariners and officers, according to the custome, anduse of the Seas, John Brook, Master Gunner. Nicholas Anthony, Boateswaine. John Web, his Mate. Christopher Banbrucke, Thomas Davison, Robert Rosse, Thomas Simpson, quarter Masters. William White, James Smith, Thomas Painter, John Smith, their Mates. Richard Gwinne, George Goiswine, Carpenters. Robert Gwinne, Purser. Laurence Edwards, his Mate, and Couper. Richard Morgan, Cooke. Thomas Nashe, his Mate. William Light, John Brande, Cutbert Chelsie, GeorgeBlage, Thomas Walker, Thomas Allen, Edward Smith,Edward Hunt, John Fawkner, Rowland Brooke. Alexander Gardiner, Richard Molton, Surgeons, which two were taken in at Harwich. Discharged at Harwich, by reason of sicknes, George Blake, Nicholas Anthony. For pickerie ducked at the yards arme, and so discharged Thomas Nash. The Edward Bonaventure, of 160. tunnes, with her apinnesse, and a boate. Richard Chancelor, Captaine, and Pilot major of thefleete. Stephen Borowgh, Master of the ship. John Buckland, his Mate. George Burton, Arthur Edwards, Marchants. John Stafford, Minister. James Dallaber, Nicholas Newborrow, John Segswike,Thomas Francis, John Hasse, Richard Johnson, WilliamKempe.Mariners and officers, according to the custome and useof the Seas. Robert Stanton, Master Gunner. John Walker, his Mate. James Long, John Cocks, Gunners. Thomas Walter, Surgeon. Peter Palmer, Boateswaine. Richard Strowde, his Mate. John Robinson, John Carowe, Thomas Stone, Roger Lishbie, quarter Masters. John Austen, Steward: Patricke Stevens, his Mate. Austen Jacks, Cooke. William Every, Cowper. Griffin Wagham, Carpenter. Thomas Stelston, Thomas Townes, John Robinson, John White, William Laurence, Miles Butter, John Browne, William Morren, William Watson, ThomasHandcocks, Edward Pacie, Thomas Browne, ArthurPet, George Phibarie, Edward Patterson, William Beare,John Potter, Nicholas Lawrence, William Burrough,Roger Welford, John Williams. The Bona Confidentia of 90. tunnes, having with hera pinnesse, and a boate. Cornelius Durfoorth, Master of the shippe. Richard Ingram, his Mate. Thomas Langlie, Edward Kever, Henrie Dorset,Marchants.Mariners and officers, according to the use and customeof the Sea. Henrie Tailer, Master Gunner. George Thurland, his Mate. William Hamane, Boateswaine. John Edwards, his Mate. Thomas Kirbie, Henrie Dickenson, John Haye, WilliamShepwash, quarter Masters. John Reyne, Steward. Thomas Hante, Cooke. William Lassie, his Mate. Nicholas Knight, Carpenter. Peter Lewike, Nicholas Wiggleworth, John Moore, William Chapman, Brian Chester, William Barrie,Richard Wood, Clement Gibson, John Clarocke, ErasmusBently, John Duriforth. The Juramentum, or othe, ministred to the Captaine.You shall sweare to be a faithfull, true, and loyal subjectin all points, and duties, that to a subject appertaineth,to our soveraigne Lord the kings Majestie, his heires,and successors: and that you shall wel and truely tothe uttermost of your capacitie, wit, & knowledge, servethis present voiage, committed to your charge, and notto give up, nor sooner intermit the same, until you shallhave atchieved the same, so farre foorth, as you maywithout danger of your life, and losse of the fleete: youshall give good, true, and faithful counsell to the saidsocietie, and to such as shal have the charge with orunder you, and not to disclose the secrets, or privitiesof the same to any person by any maner of meane, tothe prejudice, hurt, or damage of it. You shal ministerjustice to all men under your charge, without respectof person, or any affection, that might move you todecline from the true ministration of justice. Andfurther, you shal observe, and cause to be observed, asmuch as in you lieth, all and singular rules, articles,provisions hitherto made, or heereafter to be made forthe preservation or safeconduct of the fleete and voyage,and benefit of the company. You shall not permit norsuffer the stocke or goods of the company to be wasted,imbezeled, or consumed, but shall conserve the same wholeand entire, without diminishment, untill you shall havedelivered, or cause to be delivered the same, to the useof the companie. And finally you shal use your selfein all points, sorts, and conditions, as to a faithfullcaptaine, and brother of this companie shall belong andappertaine: So helpe you God, &c. The othe ministred to the Maister of the ship, &c.You shall sweare by the holy contents in that booke,that you according and to the uttermost of your knowledge, and good understanding in mariners science andcraft, shall in your vocation doe your best to conduct thegood shippe called the N. &c. whereof you nowe areMaister under God, both unto and from the portes ofyour discoverie, and so use your indevour and faithfulldiligence, in charging, discharging, lading againe, androomaging of the same shippe, as may be most for thebenefite and profite of this right woorshipfull fellowship :and you shall not privately bargein, buy, sell, exchange,barter, or distribute any goods, wares, merchandize, orthings whatsoever (necessary tackles and victuals for theshippe onely excepted) to or for your owne lucre, gaineor profit, neither to nor for the private lucre, gaine, orprofit of any other person or persons whatsoever. Andfurther, If you shall know any boatswaine, mariner, orany other person or persons whatsoever, to buy, sell,barter, trucke, or exchange any goods, wares, marchandizes, or things for private account, reckoning, or behalfe,you shall doe your best to withstand and let the same:and if you cannot commodiously so doe, that then beforethe discharge of such goods bought for privat account,you shal give knowledge therof to the cape marchant ofthis said fellowship for the time being. And you shalnot receive nor take, nor suffer to be received or takeninto your said ship during this voyage any maner personor persons whatsoever, going or returning, but onelythose mariners which without fraud or guile shall be hiredto be of your company, and to serve in mariners craftand science onely: So helpe you God, &c. These foresaid shippes being fully furnished with theirpinnesses and boates, well appointed with al maner ofartillerie, and other things necessary for their defencewith al the men aforesaid, departed from Ratcliffe, andvaled unto Detford, the 10. day of May, 1553. The 11. day about two of the clocke, we departedfrom Detford, passing by Greenwich, saluting the kingsMajesty then being there, shooting off our ordinance,& so valed unto Blackwall, and there remained until the17. day, and that day in the morning we went fromBlackwall, and came to Woolwich by nine of the clocke,and there remained one tide, and so the same night untoHeyreth. The 18. day from Heyreth unto Gravesend, and there remained until the twentieth day: that day being Saterday, from Gravesend unto Tilberie Hope, remaining thereuntill the two and twentieth day. The 22. day from Tilbery Hope to Hollie haven. The 23. day from Hollie Haven, till we came againstLee, and there remained that night, by reason that thewinde was contrary to us. The 24. day the winde being in the Southwest in themorning, we sailed along the coast over the Spits, untillwe came against S. Osyth, about sixe of the clocke atnight, and there came to anker, and abode there all thatnight. The 25. day about tenne of the clocke we departedfrom S. Osyth, and so sailed forward unto the Nase,and there abode that night for winde and tide. The 26. day at five of the clock in the morning, weweyed our anker, and sailed over the Nase, the windebeing at the Southwest, untill wee came to Orwell wands,and there came to an anker, and abode there untill the28. day. The same day being Trinitie Sunday about 7. of theclocke before noone we weyed our ankers, and sailed tilwe came athwart Walsursye, and there came to an anker. The 29. day from thence to Holmehead, where westayed that day, where we consulted which way, andwhat courses were best to be holden for the discoverieof our voyage, and there agreed. The 30. day of May at five of the clocke in the morningwee set saile, and came against Yermouth about threeleagues into the sea, riding there at anker all that night. The last of May into the sea sixe leagues Northeast,and there taried that night, where the winde blew verysore. The first of June the winde being at North contraryto us, wee came backe againe to Orwell, and remainedthere untill the 15. day, tarying for the winde, for allthis time the winde was contrary to our purpose. The 15 day being at Orwel in the latitude of 52 degrees,in the morning wee weyed our ankers, and went forthinto the wands about two miles from the towne, and laythere that night. The 16 day at eight of the clocke we set forward, andsayled untill we came athwart Alburrough, and therestayed that night. The 17 day about five of the clocke before noone wewent backe unto Orfordnesse, and there remained untillthe 19 day. The 19 day at eight of the clocke in the morning wewent backe to Orwel, and abode there three dayes taryingfor the winde. The 23 day of June the wind being faire in the Southwest we hailed into the seas to Orfordnesse, and fromthence into the seas ten leagues Northeast: then beingpast the sands, we changed our course sixe leagues Northnortheast: about midnight we changed our course againe,and went due North, continuing in the same unto the27 day. The 27 day about seven of the clocke Northnorthwest42 leagues to the ende to fall with Shotland: then thewind veared to the West, so that we could lie but Northand by West, continuing in the same course 40 leagues,whereby we could not fetch Shotland: then we sayledNorth 16 leagues by estimation, after that North andby West, & Nortnorthwest, then Southeast, with diversother courses, traversing and tracing the seas, by reasonof sundry and manifolde contrary windes, untill the 14day of July: and then the sunne entring into Leo, wediscovered land Eastward of us, unto the which we sayledthat night as much as we might: and after wee went onshore with our Pinnesse, & found little houses to thenumber of 30, where we knew that it was inhabited, butthe people were fled away, as we judged, for feare of us. The land was all full of little Islands, and that innumerable, which were called (as we learned afterwards)&AElig;geland and Halgeland, which lieth from OrfordnesseNorth and by East, being in the latitude of 66 degrees.The distance betweene Orfordnesse and &AElig;geland 250leagues. Then we sailed from thence 12 leagues Northwest, and found many other Islandes, and there came toanker the 19 day, and manned our Pinnesse, and wenton shore to the Islands, and found people mowing andmaking of hay, which came to the shore and welcomedus. In which place were an innumerable sort of Islands,which were called the Isles of Rost, being under thedominion of the king of Denmarke: which place was inlatitude 66 degrees, and 30 minutes. The winde beingcontrary, we remayned there three dayes, & there wasan innumerable sort of foules of divers kindes, of whichwe tooke very many. The 22 day the winde comming fayre, we departedfrom Rost, sailing Northnortheast, keeping the sea untillthe 27 day, and then we drew neere unto the land, whichwas still East of us: then went foorth our Pinnesse toseeke harborow, & found many good harbours, of thewhich we entred into one with our shippes, which wascalled Stanfew, and the land being Islands, were calledLewfoot, or Lofoot, which were plentifully inhabited,and very gentle people, being also under the king ofDenmarke: but we could not learne how farre it wasfrom the maine land: and we remained there until the30 day, being in latitude 68 degrees, and from the foresaidRost about 30 leagues Northnortheast. The 30 day of July about noone we weyed our ankers, and went into the Seas, and sayled along these IslandsNorthnortheast, keeping the land still in sight untill thesecond day of August: then hailing in close aboord theland, to the entent to knowe what land it was, there camea skiffe of the Island aboord of us, of whom we askedmany questions, who shewed unto us, that the Island wascalled Seynam, which is the latitude of seventy degrees,and from Stanfew thirtie leagues, being also under theking of Denmarke, and that there was no merchandisethere, but onely dryed fish, and traine oyle. Then webeing purposed to goe unto Finmarke, inquired of him,if we might have a pilot to bring us unto Finmarke, &he said, that if we could beare in, we should have agood harbour, and on the next day a pilot to bring us toFinmarke, unto the wardhouse, which is the strongestholde in Finmarke, and most resorted to by report. Butwhen wee would have entred into an harbour, the landbeing very high on every side, there came such flawes ofwinde and terrible whirlewinds, that we were not able tobeare in, but by violence were constrained to take the seaagayne, our Pinnesse being unshipt: we sailed North andby East, the wind increasing so sore that we were notable to beare any saile, but tooke them in, and lay a drift,to the end to let the storme over passe. And that nightby violence of winde, and thickenesse of mists, we werenot able to keepe together within sight, and then aboutmidnight we lost our pinnesse, which was a discomfortunto us. Assoone as it was day, and the fogge overpast,we looked about, and at the last we descried one of ourshippes to Leeward of us: then we spred an hullocke ofour foresaile, and bare roome with her, which was theConfidence, but the Edward we could not see. Then theflaw something abating, we and the Confidence hoysedup our sailes the fourth day, sayling Northeast and byNorth, to the end to fall with the Wardhouse, as we didconsult to doe before, in case we should part company.Thus running Northeast and by North, and Northeastfiftie leagues, then we sounded, and had 160 fadomes,whereby we thought to be farre from land, and perceivedthat the land lay not as the Globe made mention. Wherfore we changed our course the sixt day, and sailedSoutheast and by South eight and fortie leagues, thinkingthereby to find the Wardhouse. The eight day much winde rising at the Westnorthwest, we not knowing how the coast lay, strook oursayles, and lay a drift, where we sounded and found 160fadomes as afore. The ninth day, the wind vearing to the South Southeast, we sailed Northeast 25 leagues. The tenth day we sounded, and could get no ground,neither yet could see any land, wherat we wondered: thenthe wind comming at the Northeast, we ran Southeastabout 48 leagues. The 11 day, the wind being at South, we sounded,and found 40 fadoms, and faire sand. The 12 day the winde being at South and by East, welay with our saile East, and East and by North 30leagues. The 14 day early in the morning we descried land,which land we bare with all, hoising out our boat todiscover what land it might be: but the boat could notcome to land the water was so shoale, where was verymuch ice also, but there was no similitude of habitation,and this land lyeth from Seynam East and by North 160leagues, being in latitude 72 degrees. Then we plyedto the Northward the 15, 16 and 17 day. The 18 day, the winde comming at the Northeast,and the Confidence being troubled with bilge water, andstocked, we thought it good to seeke harbour for herredresse: then we bare roome the 18 day Southsoutheast,about 70 leagues. The 21 day we sounded, and found 10 fadome, afterthat we sounded againe, and found but 7 fadome, soshoalder and shoalder water, and yet could see no land,where we marveiled greatly: to avoide this danger, webare roomer into the sea all that night Northwest andby West. The next day we sounded, and had 20 fadoms, thenshaped our course, and ran West Southwest untill the23. day: then we descried Low land, unto which we bareas nigh as we could, and it appeared unto us unhabitable.Then wee plyed Westward along by that lande, whichlyeth West Southwest, and East Northeast, and muchwinde blowing at the West, we haled into the sea Northand by East 30. leagues. Then the winde commingabout at the Northeast, we sailed West Northwest: afterthat, the winde bearing to the Northwest, we lay withour sailes West southwest, about 14. leagues, and thendescried land, and bare in with it, being the 28. day,finding shoale water, and bare it till we came to 3.fadome, then perceiving it to be shoale water, and alsoseeing drie sands, we haled out againe Northeast alongthat land until we came to the point therof. That landturning to the Westwarde, we ran along 16. leaguesNorthwest: then comming into a faire bay, we wenton land with our boat, which place was unhabited, butyet it appeared unto us that the people had bin there,by crosses, and other signes: from thence we went allalong the coast Westward. The fourth day of September we lost sight of land, byreason of contrary winds, and the eight day we descriedland againe. Within two dayes after we lost the sightof it: then running West and by South about 30. leagues,we gat the sight of land againe, and bare in with it untillnight: then perceiving it to be a lee shore, we gat usinto the sea, to the end to have sea roome. The 12. of September we hailed to shoareward againe,having then indifferent winde and weather: then beingneere unto the shoare, and the tide almost spent, weecame to an anker in 30. fadoms water. The 13. day we came along the coast, which lay Northwest and by West and Southeast and by East. The 14. day we came to an anker within two leaguesof the shoare, having 60. fadoms. There we went a shore with our boat, & found twoor three good harboroughs, the land being rocky, andhigh, but as for people could we see none. The 15 daywe ran still along the coast untill the 17 day: then thewinde being contrary unto us, we thought it best toreturne unto the harbor which we had found before, andso we bare roomer with the same, howbeit we could notaccomplish our desire that day. The next day being the18 of September, we entred into the haven, and therecame to an anker at 6 fadoms. This haven runneth intothe maine, about two leagues, and is in bredth halfe aleague, wherein were very many seale fishes, & othergreat fishes, and upon the maine we saw beares, greatdeere, foxes, with divers strange beasts, as guloines,and such other which were to us unknowen, and alsowonderfull. Thus remaining in this haven the space ofa weeke, seeing the yeare farre spent, & also very evillwether, as frost, snow, and haile, as though it had beenethe deepe of winter, we thought best to winter there.Wherefore we sent out three men Southsouthwest, tosearch if they could find people, who went three dayesjourney, but could finde none: after that, we sent otherthree Westward foure daies journey, which also returnedwithout finding any people. Then sent we three menSoutheast three dayes journey, who in like sorte returnedwithout finding of people, or any similitude of habitation.These two notes following were written upon theoutside of this Pamphlet, or Booke. 1 The proceedings of Sir Hugh Willoughbie after hewas separated from the Edward Bonaventure. 2 Our shippe being at an anker in the harbour calledSterfier in the Island Lofoote. The river or haven wherein Sir Hugh Willoughbiewith the companie of his two ships perished for cold,is called Arzina in Lapland, neere unto Kegor. But itappeareth by a Will found in the ship that Sir HughWilloughbie and most of the company were alive inJanuary 1554.', 'The names of the shippes of the fleete, and of theirburden, together with the names of the Captaines, and Counsellors, Pilot Major, Masters of the ships, Marchants, with other officers, and Mariners, as hereafter followeth. The Bona Esperanza, Admirall of the fleete, of 120.tunnes, having with her a pinnesse, and a boate. Sir Hugh Willoughby, knight, Captaine generall ofthe fleete. William Gefferson, Master of the shippe. Roger Wilson, his Mate. William Gittons, Charles Barret, Gabriel Willoughby,John Andrews, Alexander Woodfoord, Ralph Chatterton,Marchants.Mariners and officers, according to the custome, anduse of the Seas, John Brook, Master Gunner. Nicholas Anthony, Boateswaine. John Web, his Mate. Christopher Banbrucke, Thomas Davison, Robert Rosse, Thomas Simpson, quarter Masters. William White, James Smith, Thomas Painter, John Smith, their Mates. Richard Gwinne, George Goiswine, Carpenters. Robert Gwinne, Purser. Laurence Edwards, his Mate, and Couper. Richard Morgan, Cooke. Thomas Nashe, his Mate. William Light, John Brande, Cutbert Chelsie, GeorgeBlage, Thomas Walker, Thomas Allen, Edward Smith,Edward Hunt, John Fawkner, Rowland Brooke. Alexander Gardiner, Richard Molton, Surgeons, which two were taken in at Harwich. Discharged at Harwich, by reason of sicknes, George Blake, Nicholas Anthony. For pickerie ducked at the yards arme, and so discharged Thomas Nash. The Edward Bonaventure, of 160. tunnes, with her apinnesse, and a boate. Richard Chancelor, Captaine, and Pilot major of thefleete. Stephen Borowgh, Master of the ship. John Buckland, his Mate. George Burton, Arthur Edwards, Marchants. John Stafford, Minister. James Dallaber, Nicholas Newborrow, John Segswike,Thomas Francis, John Hasse, Richard Johnson, WilliamKempe.Mariners and officers, according to the custome and useof the Seas. Robert Stanton, Master Gunner. John Walker, his Mate. James Long, John Cocks, Gunners. Thomas Walter, Surgeon. Peter Palmer, Boateswaine. Richard Strowde, his Mate. John Robinson, John Carowe, Thomas Stone, Roger Lishbie, quarter Masters. John Austen, Steward: Patricke Stevens, his Mate. Austen Jacks, Cooke. William Every, Cowper. Griffin Wagham, Carpenter. Thomas Stelston, Thomas Townes, John Robinson, John White, William Laurence, Miles Butter, John Browne, William Morren, William Watson, ThomasHandcocks, Edward Pacie, Thomas Browne, ArthurPet, George Phibarie, Edward Patterson, William Beare,John Potter, Nicholas Lawrence, William Burrough,Roger Welford, John Williams. The Bona Confidentia of 90. tunnes, having with hera pinnesse, and a boate. Cornelius Durfoorth, Master of the shippe. Richard Ingram, his Mate. Thomas Langlie, Edward Kever, Henrie Dorset,Marchants.Mariners and officers, according to the use and customeof the Sea. Henrie Tailer, Master Gunner. George Thurland, his Mate. William Hamane, Boateswaine. John Edwards, his Mate. Thomas Kirbie, Henrie Dickenson, John Haye, WilliamShepwash, quarter Masters. John Reyne, Steward. Thomas Hante, Cooke. William Lassie, his Mate. Nicholas Knight, Carpenter. Peter Lewike, Nicholas Wiggleworth, John Moore, William Chapman, Brian Chester, William Barrie,Richard Wood, Clement Gibson, John Clarocke, ErasmusBently, John Duriforth.', 'Mariners and officers, according to the custome, anduse of the Seas, John Brook, Master Gunner. Nicholas Anthony, Boateswaine. John Web, his Mate. Christopher Banbrucke, Thomas Davison, Robert Rosse, Thomas Simpson, quarter Masters. William White, James Smith, Thomas Painter, John Smith, their Mates. Richard Gwinne, George Goiswine, Carpenters. Robert Gwinne, Purser. Laurence Edwards, his Mate, and Couper. Richard Morgan, Cooke. Thomas Nashe, his Mate. William Light, John Brande, Cutbert Chelsie, GeorgeBlage, Thomas Walker, Thomas Allen, Edward Smith,Edward Hunt, John Fawkner, Rowland Brooke. Alexander Gardiner, Richard Molton, Surgeons, which two were taken in at Harwich. Discharged at Harwich, by reason of sicknes, George Blake, Nicholas Anthony. For pickerie ducked at the yards arme, and so discharged Thomas Nash. The Edward Bonaventure, of 160. tunnes, with her apinnesse, and a boate. Richard Chancelor, Captaine, and Pilot major of thefleete. Stephen Borowgh, Master of the ship. John Buckland, his Mate. George Burton, Arthur Edwards, Marchants. John Stafford, Minister. James Dallaber, Nicholas Newborrow, John Segswike,Thomas Francis, John Hasse, Richard Johnson, WilliamKempe.', 'Mariners and officers, according to the custome and useof the Seas. Robert Stanton, Master Gunner. John Walker, his Mate. James Long, John Cocks, Gunners. Thomas Walter, Surgeon. Peter Palmer, Boateswaine. Richard Strowde, his Mate. John Robinson, John Carowe, Thomas Stone, Roger Lishbie, quarter Masters. John Austen, Steward: Patricke Stevens, his Mate. Austen Jacks, Cooke. William Every, Cowper. Griffin Wagham, Carpenter. Thomas Stelston, Thomas Townes, John Robinson, John White, William Laurence, Miles Butter, John Browne, William Morren, William Watson, ThomasHandcocks, Edward Pacie, Thomas Browne, ArthurPet, George Phibarie, Edward Patterson, William Beare,John Potter, Nicholas Lawrence, William Burrough,Roger Welford, John Williams. The Bona Confidentia of 90. tunnes, having with hera pinnesse, and a boate. Cornelius Durfoorth, Master of the shippe. Richard Ingram, his Mate. Thomas Langlie, Edward Kever, Henrie Dorset,Marchants.', 'Mariners and officers, according to the use and customeof the Sea. Henrie Tailer, Master Gunner. George Thurland, his Mate. William Hamane, Boateswaine. John Edwards, his Mate. Thomas Kirbie, Henrie Dickenson, John Haye, WilliamShepwash, quarter Masters. John Reyne, Steward. Thomas Hante, Cooke. William Lassie, his Mate. Nicholas Knight, Carpenter. Peter Lewike, Nicholas Wiggleworth, John Moore, William Chapman, Brian Chester, William Barrie,Richard Wood, Clement Gibson, John Clarocke, ErasmusBently, John Duriforth.', 'The Juramentum, or othe, ministred to the Captaine.You shall sweare to be a faithfull, true, and loyal subjectin all points, and duties, that to a subject appertaineth,to our soveraigne Lord the kings Majestie, his heires,and successors: and that you shall wel and truely tothe uttermost of your capacitie, wit, & knowledge, servethis present voiage, committed to your charge, and notto give up, nor sooner intermit the same, until you shallhave atchieved the same, so farre foorth, as you maywithout danger of your life, and losse of the fleete: youshall give good, true, and faithful counsell to the saidsocietie, and to such as shal have the charge with orunder you, and not to disclose the secrets, or privitiesof the same to any person by any maner of meane, tothe prejudice, hurt, or damage of it. You shal ministerjustice to all men under your charge, without respectof person, or any affection, that might move you todecline from the true ministration of justice. Andfurther, you shal observe, and cause to be observed, asmuch as in you lieth, all and singular rules, articles,provisions hitherto made, or heereafter to be made forthe preservation or safeconduct of the fleete and voyage,and benefit of the company. You shall not permit norsuffer the stocke or goods of the company to be wasted,imbezeled, or consumed, but shall conserve the same wholeand entire, without diminishment, untill you shall havedelivered, or cause to be delivered the same, to the useof the companie. And finally you shal use your selfein all points, sorts, and conditions, as to a faithfullcaptaine, and brother of this companie shall belong andappertaine: So helpe you God, &c.', 'The othe ministred to the Maister of the ship, &c.You shall sweare by the holy contents in that booke,that you according and to the uttermost of your knowledge, and good understanding in mariners science andcraft, shall in your vocation doe your best to conduct thegood shippe called the N. &c. whereof you nowe areMaister under God, both unto and from the portes ofyour discoverie, and so use your indevour and faithfulldiligence, in charging, discharging, lading againe, androomaging of the same shippe, as may be most for thebenefite and profite of this right woorshipfull fellowship :and you shall not privately bargein, buy, sell, exchange,barter, or distribute any goods, wares, merchandize, orthings whatsoever (necessary tackles and victuals for theshippe onely excepted) to or for your owne lucre, gaineor profit, neither to nor for the private lucre, gaine, orprofit of any other person or persons whatsoever. Andfurther, If you shall know any boatswaine, mariner, orany other person or persons whatsoever, to buy, sell,barter, trucke, or exchange any goods, wares, marchandizes, or things for private account, reckoning, or behalfe,you shall doe your best to withstand and let the same:and if you cannot commodiously so doe, that then beforethe discharge of such goods bought for privat account,you shal give knowledge therof to the cape marchant ofthis said fellowship for the time being. And you shalnot receive nor take, nor suffer to be received or takeninto your said ship during this voyage any maner personor persons whatsoever, going or returning, but onelythose mariners which without fraud or guile shall be hiredto be of your company, and to serve in mariners craftand science onely: So helpe you God, &c.', 'These foresaid shippes being fully furnished with theirpinnesses and boates, well appointed with al maner ofartillerie, and other things necessary for their defencewith al the men aforesaid, departed from Ratcliffe, andvaled unto Detford, the 10. day of May, 1553. The 11. day about two of the clocke, we departedfrom Detford, passing by Greenwich, saluting the kingsMajesty then being there, shooting off our ordinance,& so valed unto Blackwall, and there remained until the17. day, and that day in the morning we went fromBlackwall, and came to Woolwich by nine of the clocke,and there remained one tide, and so the same night untoHeyreth. The 18. day from Heyreth unto Gravesend, and there remained until the twentieth day: that day being Saterday, from Gravesend unto Tilberie Hope, remaining thereuntill the two and twentieth day. The 22. day from Tilbery Hope to Hollie haven. The 23. day from Hollie Haven, till we came againstLee, and there remained that night, by reason that thewinde was contrary to us. The 24. day the winde being in the Southwest in themorning, we sailed along the coast over the Spits, untillwe came against S. Osyth, about sixe of the clocke atnight, and there came to anker, and abode there all thatnight. The 25. day about tenne of the clocke we departedfrom S. Osyth, and so sailed forward unto the Nase,and there abode that night for winde and tide. The 26. day at five of the clock in the morning, weweyed our anker, and sailed over the Nase, the windebeing at the Southwest, untill wee came to Orwell wands,and there came to an anker, and abode there untill the28. day. The same day being Trinitie Sunday about 7. of theclocke before noone we weyed our ankers, and sailed tilwe came athwart Walsursye, and there came to an anker. The 29. day from thence to Holmehead, where westayed that day, where we consulted which way, andwhat courses were best to be holden for the discoverieof our voyage, and there agreed. The 30. day of May at five of the clocke in the morningwee set saile, and came against Yermouth about threeleagues into the sea, riding there at anker all that night. The last of May into the sea sixe leagues Northeast,and there taried that night, where the winde blew verysore. The first of June the winde being at North contraryto us, wee came backe againe to Orwell, and remainedthere untill the 15. day, tarying for the winde, for allthis time the winde was contrary to our purpose. The 15 day being at Orwel in the latitude of 52 degrees,in the morning wee weyed our ankers, and went forthinto the wands about two miles from the towne, and laythere that night. The 16 day at eight of the clocke we set forward, andsayled untill we came athwart Alburrough, and therestayed that night. The 17 day about five of the clocke before noone wewent backe unto Orfordnesse, and there remained untillthe 19 day. The 19 day at eight of the clocke in the morning wewent backe to Orwel, and abode there three dayes taryingfor the winde. The 23 day of June the wind being faire in the Southwest we hailed into the seas to Orfordnesse, and fromthence into the seas ten leagues Northeast: then beingpast the sands, we changed our course sixe leagues Northnortheast: about midnight we changed our course againe,and went due North, continuing in the same unto the27 day. The 27 day about seven of the clocke Northnorthwest42 leagues to the ende to fall with Shotland: then thewind veared to the West, so that we could lie but Northand by West, continuing in the same course 40 leagues,whereby we could not fetch Shotland: then we sayledNorth 16 leagues by estimation, after that North andby West, & Nortnorthwest, then Southeast, with diversother courses, traversing and tracing the seas, by reasonof sundry and manifolde contrary windes, untill the 14day of July: and then the sunne entring into Leo, wediscovered land Eastward of us, unto the which we sayledthat night as much as we might: and after wee went onshore with our Pinnesse, & found little houses to thenumber of 30, where we knew that it was inhabited, butthe people were fled away, as we judged, for feare of us. The land was all full of little Islands, and that innumerable, which were called (as we learned afterwards)&AElig;geland and Halgeland, which lieth from OrfordnesseNorth and by East, being in the latitude of 66 degrees.The distance betweene Orfordnesse and &AElig;geland 250leagues. Then we sailed from thence 12 leagues Northwest, and found many other Islandes, and there came toanker the 19 day, and manned our Pinnesse, and wenton shore to the Islands, and found people mowing andmaking of hay, which came to the shore and welcomedus. In which place were an innumerable sort of Islands,which were called the Isles of Rost, being under thedominion of the king of Denmarke: which place was inlatitude 66 degrees, and 30 minutes. The winde beingcontrary, we remayned there three dayes, & there wasan innumerable sort of foules of divers kindes, of whichwe tooke very many. The 22 day the winde comming fayre, we departedfrom Rost, sailing Northnortheast, keeping the sea untillthe 27 day, and then we drew neere unto the land, whichwas still East of us: then went foorth our Pinnesse toseeke harborow, & found many good harbours, of thewhich we entred into one with our shippes, which wascalled Stanfew, and the land being Islands, were calledLewfoot, or Lofoot, which were plentifully inhabited,and very gentle people, being also under the king ofDenmarke: but we could not learne how farre it wasfrom the maine land: and we remained there until the30 day, being in latitude 68 degrees, and from the foresaidRost about 30 leagues Northnortheast. The 30 day of July about noone we weyed our ankers, and went into the Seas, and sayled along these IslandsNorthnortheast, keeping the land still in sight untill thesecond day of August: then hailing in close aboord theland, to the entent to knowe what land it was, there camea skiffe of the Island aboord of us, of whom we askedmany questions, who shewed unto us, that the Island wascalled Seynam, which is the latitude of seventy degrees,and from Stanfew thirtie leagues, being also under theking of Denmarke, and that there was no merchandisethere, but onely dryed fish, and traine oyle. Then webeing purposed to goe unto Finmarke, inquired of him,if we might have a pilot to bring us unto Finmarke, &he said, that if we could beare in, we should have agood harbour, and on the next day a pilot to bring us toFinmarke, unto the wardhouse, which is the strongestholde in Finmarke, and most resorted to by report. Butwhen wee would have entred into an harbour, the landbeing very high on every side, there came such flawes ofwinde and terrible whirlewinds, that we were not able tobeare in, but by violence were constrained to take the seaagayne, our Pinnesse being unshipt: we sailed North andby East, the wind increasing so sore that we were notable to beare any saile, but tooke them in, and lay a drift,to the end to let the storme over passe. And that nightby violence of winde, and thickenesse of mists, we werenot able to keepe together within sight, and then aboutmidnight we lost our pinnesse, which was a discomfortunto us. Assoone as it was day, and the fogge overpast,we looked about, and at the last we descried one of ourshippes to Leeward of us: then we spred an hullocke ofour foresaile, and bare roome with her, which was theConfidence, but the Edward we could not see. Then theflaw something abating, we and the Confidence hoysedup our sailes the fourth day, sayling Northeast and byNorth, to the end to fall with the Wardhouse, as we didconsult to doe before, in case we should part company.Thus running Northeast and by North, and Northeastfiftie leagues, then we sounded, and had 160 fadomes,whereby we thought to be farre from land, and perceivedthat the land lay not as the Globe made mention. Wherfore we changed our course the sixt day, and sailedSoutheast and by South eight and fortie leagues, thinkingthereby to find the Wardhouse. The eight day much winde rising at the Westnorthwest, we not knowing how the coast lay, strook oursayles, and lay a drift, where we sounded and found 160fadomes as afore. The ninth day, the wind vearing to the South Southeast, we sailed Northeast 25 leagues. The tenth day we sounded, and could get no ground,neither yet could see any land, wherat we wondered: thenthe wind comming at the Northeast, we ran Southeastabout 48 leagues. The 11 day, the wind being at South, we sounded,and found 40 fadoms, and faire sand. The 12 day the winde being at South and by East, welay with our saile East, and East and by North 30leagues. The 14 day early in the morning we descried land,which land we bare with all, hoising out our boat todiscover what land it might be: but the boat could notcome to land the water was so shoale, where was verymuch ice also, but there was no similitude of habitation,and this land lyeth from Seynam East and by North 160leagues, being in latitude 72 degrees. Then we plyedto the Northward the 15, 16 and 17 day. The 18 day, the winde comming at the Northeast,and the Confidence being troubled with bilge water, andstocked, we thought it good to seeke harbour for herredresse: then we bare roome the 18 day Southsoutheast,about 70 leagues. The 21 day we sounded, and found 10 fadome, afterthat we sounded againe, and found but 7 fadome, soshoalder and shoalder water, and yet could see no land,where we marveiled greatly: to avoide this danger, webare roomer into the sea all that night Northwest andby West. The next day we sounded, and had 20 fadoms, thenshaped our course, and ran West Southwest untill the23. day: then we descried Low land, unto which we bareas nigh as we could, and it appeared unto us unhabitable.Then wee plyed Westward along by that lande, whichlyeth West Southwest, and East Northeast, and muchwinde blowing at the West, we haled into the sea Northand by East 30. leagues. Then the winde commingabout at the Northeast, we sailed West Northwest: afterthat, the winde bearing to the Northwest, we lay withour sailes West southwest, about 14. leagues, and thendescried land, and bare in with it, being the 28. day,finding shoale water, and bare it till we came to 3.fadome, then perceiving it to be shoale water, and alsoseeing drie sands, we haled out againe Northeast alongthat land until we came to the point therof. That landturning to the Westwarde, we ran along 16. leaguesNorthwest: then comming into a faire bay, we wenton land with our boat, which place was unhabited, butyet it appeared unto us that the people had bin there,by crosses, and other signes: from thence we went allalong the coast Westward. The fourth day of September we lost sight of land, byreason of contrary winds, and the eight day we descriedland againe. Within two dayes after we lost the sightof it: then running West and by South about 30. leagues,we gat the sight of land againe, and bare in with it untillnight: then perceiving it to be a lee shore, we gat usinto the sea, to the end to have sea roome. The 12. of September we hailed to shoareward againe,having then indifferent winde and weather: then beingneere unto the shoare, and the tide almost spent, weecame to an anker in 30. fadoms water. The 13. day we came along the coast, which lay Northwest and by West and Southeast and by East. The 14. day we came to an anker within two leaguesof the shoare, having 60. fadoms. There we went a shore with our boat, & found twoor three good harboroughs, the land being rocky, andhigh, but as for people could we see none. The 15 daywe ran still along the coast untill the 17 day: then thewinde being contrary unto us, we thought it best toreturne unto the harbor which we had found before, andso we bare roomer with the same, howbeit we could notaccomplish our desire that day. The next day being the18 of September, we entred into the haven, and therecame to an anker at 6 fadoms. This haven runneth intothe maine, about two leagues, and is in bredth halfe aleague, wherein were very many seale fishes, & othergreat fishes, and upon the maine we saw beares, greatdeere, foxes, with divers strange beasts, as guloines,and such other which were to us unknowen, and alsowonderfull. Thus remaining in this haven the space ofa weeke, seeing the yeare farre spent, & also very evillwether, as frost, snow, and haile, as though it had beenethe deepe of winter, we thought best to winter there.Wherefore we sent out three men Southsouthwest, tosearch if they could find people, who went three dayesjourney, but could finde none: after that, we sent otherthree Westward foure daies journey, which also returnedwithout finding any people. Then sent we three menSoutheast three dayes journey, who in like sorte returnedwithout finding of people, or any similitude of habitation.', 'These two notes following were written upon theoutside of this Pamphlet, or Booke. 1 The proceedings of Sir Hugh Willoughbie after hewas separated from the Edward Bonaventure. 2 Our shippe being at an anker in the harbour calledSterfier in the Island Lofoote. The river or haven wherein Sir Hugh Willoughbiewith the companie of his two ships perished for cold,is called Arzina in Lapland, neere unto Kegor. But itappeareth by a Will found in the ship that Sir HughWilloughbie and most of the company were alive inJanuary 1554.']